GRESS SOUNDS PERFECT.
ALL RIGHT, WELCOME TO THE
WEDNESDAY APRIL 17TH TWO
THOUSAND TWENTY FOUR ELECTRONIC
MEETING OF THE NO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER ANSWER MEETING
ID NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN VIA THE ZOOM LINK
.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN PUBLIC NOTICE THIS
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16 EVERY
MINUTE YOU COULD CALL PLEASE
AND I'LL ACTUALLY HAND IT OVER
TO CHRIS I RECEIVE RIGOUROUS
FROM COMMISSIONER OF POLICE AND
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON WILL
NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND TODAY.
PLEASE SEE HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU'RE DINING WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COMMISSIONER BOLDEN,
YOU'RE FROM ANN ARBOR.
>> COMMISSIONER BRIGGS.
OK, COMMISSIONER BROGAN, YOU'RE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
KEMBLE HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER HAUTAMKI YOU'RE
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
LOOK HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER KILLER
CHRIS I
WILL NOTE LARRY IS HERE.
YEAH.
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT LARRY
CAN TALK.
>> I HAD TO CALL BACK BECAUSE
FOR SOME REASON I WASN'T ABLE
TO MEET UNMUTED.
>> WELL WE'RE HAPPY I'M HERE
ALREADY.
KILAR COMMISSIONER FROM ANN
ARBOR AND I AM CALLING FROM MY
OFFICE OK IN OUR COMMISSIONER
YOU'RE FROM ANN ARBOR.
OK, COMMISSIONER BRIGGS HERE IN
YELLOW SPRINGS, OHIO.
>> OK, AND COMMISSIONER
CARPENTER, YOU'RE FROM SUPERIOR
TOWNSHIP I'M SURE COMMISSIONER
I'M ASSUMING YOU'RE FROM ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONER HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR AND LIEUTENANT MIKE
SCHERBA
, I THANK YOU.
WE HAVE A QUORUM.
>> YEP.
ALL RIGHT.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
CONSENT AGENDA TONIGHT APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSULT AGENDA?
ALL RIGHT.
SEEING NONE OF THEIR MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED MOVE BY ONE.
WE WERE SECONDED BY MEGHAN.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE
YOUR HAND ALL THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
THE CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
.
NEXT UP IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
READING.
I'D NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR CONNECT VIA ZOOM AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA CITY
STAFF SELECT CALLERS THAT HAVE
RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY ONE
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSON ZOOMED IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RACE
HAND BUTTON AND YOU'LL AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK
WHEN SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA.
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND
SOUNDS SO WE CAN HEAR YOU
CLEARLY RAYMONDO.
HAVE ANY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
WHO WISH TO SPEAK NOT SEEING
ANY HANDS RAISED AT THE MOMENT
JUST A MOMENT OR TWO.
ALL RIGHT.
I GUESS WE CAN MOVE ON RIGHT.
>> NEVERTHELESS, THANK YOU TO
THOSE WHO FORWARDED EMAILS TO
OUR ATTENTION.
THERE ARE FIVE EMAILS INCLUDING
ATTACHMENTS IN THE PACKET, TWO
OF WHICH WERE ADDED THIS WEEK
AFTER THE PACKET WAS NATIONALLY
DISTRIBUTED DISTRIBUTED.
SO PLEASE TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE
IF YOU HAVEN'T ALREADY.
THERE ARE NO BUSINESS ITEMS ON
OUR AGENDA THIS MONTH SO MOVING
INTO INFORMATION AND DISCUSSION
FIRST UP IS THE FISCAL OR
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE BUDGET
DISCUSSION EVERY YEAR WE
GET AN
UPDATE FROM THE CITY'S CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER MARTY
PURSHOTTAM ON THE UPCOMING
BUDGET THAT WILL BE VOTED ON BY
CITY COUNCIL IN MAY.
SO MARTY IS HERE WITH US
TONIGHT TO GIVE US THE
PRESENTATION ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT WE MIGHT HAVE
MARTY, THAT EVENING?
>> COULD YOU LET ME KNOW IF YOU
ARE VIEWING MY PRESENTATION?
>> IT LOOKS GOOD, RIGHT?
AWESOME.
THANK YOU ONCE AGAIN FOR HAVING
ME HERE THIS EVENING ON MY
ANNUAL VISIT TO YOUR TO YOUR
COMMISSION.
I'M HAPPY TO PRESENT SOME
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE ANNUAL CITY
OF ANN ARBOR BUDGET ATTEMPT TO
GIVE A SPECIAL ATTENTION TO
THOSE AREAS THAT MAY INTEREST
YOUR COMMISSION.
I WILL TRY AND BE BRIEF BECAUSE
I UNDERSTAND YOU HAVE A YOU
HAVE A BUSY SCHEDULE BUT I AM
VERY HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT YOU HAVE NOW OR
LATER ALWAYS HAPPY TO TALK
BUDGET AND NUMBERS SO PLEASE
FEEL FREE.
A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET
WHICH CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO
HONY DELIVERED TO COUNCIL THIS
PAST MONDAY EVENING.
WE ARE PRESENTING A BALANCED
BUDGET OF FIVE HUNDRED AND
SIXTY THREE AND A HALF MILLION
DOLLARS AND THAT PARTICULAR
AMOUNT IS IN LINE WITH THE PAST
FEW PRESENTED BUDGETS.
SO IT'S NOT AN AMOUNT THAT IS
OUT OF THE ORDINARY.
THAT BUDGET IS CONSISTING
OF ONE HUNDRED THIRTY NINE
POINT SEVEN DOLLARS MILLION
OF GENERAL FUND MONEYS NINETY
ONE POINT THREE OF SPECIAL
REVENUE EXPENDITURES ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY FOUR AND
ENTERPRISE FUNDS FIFTY THREE
MILLION DOLLARS IN TRUST FUNDS
AND THEN OUR CATCH ALL CATEGORY
OF ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIVE
MILLION WHICH HAS THINGS IN IT
LIKE OUR INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS
WHICH ARE DEPARTMENTS THAT
PROVIDE SERVICES TO OTHER
DEPARTMENTS WITHIN THE CITY FOR
EXAMPLE FLEET SERVICES OR I.T.
THOSE TYPES OF UNITS HAVE THEIR
OWN FUNDS IN WHICH THEY CHARGE
OTHER USING DEPARTMENT WHERE
I'M GOING TO FOCUS FOR OUR
DISCUSSION THIS EVENING IS
REALLY IN THE SPECIAL REVENUES
CATEGORY.
THAT'S WHERE MOST OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ACTIVITIES TAKE
PLACE AND WHERE WE FUND THOSE
MOST OF THOSE TYPES
OF ACTIVITIES.
WE'RE GOING TO BEGIN WITH THE
MAJOR AND LOCAL FUNDS YOU MAY
HEAR THAT ALSO REFERRED TO AS
FIFTY ONE PUBLIC ACTIVITY, ONE
WEIGHT AND GASOLINE TAX OR
MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION FUNDS.
THOSE ARE FUNDS THAT ARE
COLLECTED VIA THE TAX WE ALL
PAY AT THE GAS PUMP.
THOSE REVENUES ARE DISTRIBUTED
BY THE STATE OF MICHIGAN BASED
ON A FORMULA THAT TAKES INTO
ACCOUNT THE CITIES MILES
OF ROADS AS WELL AS THEIR
POPULATION FACTORS.
>> THE ACTUAL FUNDS COME IN
VERY TWO SEPARATE CATEGORIES
EITHER THE MAJOR CATEGORY HERE
IN THE BLUE OR IN THE ORANGE
CATEGORY THE LOCAL STREET
MONIES AND YOU CAN SEE WE GET
FAR MORE REVENUE ON THE MAJOR
STREET SIDE BECAUSE WE HAVE A
LOT MORE LANE MILES OF MAJOR
STREET AND THEN A SMALLER
PORTION OF LOCAL STREET DEALERS
AND THOSE HAVE TO BE TRACKED
AND ACCOUNTED FOR SEPARATELY
AND THEN WE CAN ONLY SPEND
LARGER STREET ON MAJOR STREET
ROADS IN LOCAL STREET DOLLARS
ON LOCAL STREET ROADS
ALTOGETHER WE ARE PROJECTING
ABOUT SIXTEEN POINT TWO MILLION
DOLLARS IN REVENUE THIS YEAR
FOR THE UPCOMING YEAR.
>> I WILL SAY THAT THAT
BASICALLY IS JUST A SLIGHT
INCREASE BECAUSE AGAIN THAT IS
BASED ON SALES OF GASOLINE,
GASOLINE SALES HAVE BEEN RATHER
FLAT AND WITH THE ECONOMY THE
WAY IT IS, IT'S A LITTLE BIT
WE'RE STILL KIND OF IN AN
INFLATIONARY ENVIRONMENT AND
SOMETIMES THE IMPACTS
OF INFLATIONARY ENVIRONMENTS
DON'T HIT THE GASOLINE TAX
UNTIL A BIT LATER SO PEOPLE'S
BEHAVIORS DON'T TEND TO BE
MODIFIED FOR PERIODS OF TIME.
SO WE ARE WE ARE ESTIMATING
ONLY LIKE A THREE PERCENT
INCREASE IN THE REVENUE SECTION
ON THAT PART OF THE BUDGET
MOVING OVER TO THE EXPENSE SIDE
OF THAT BUDGET REPRESENTED HERE
IN THE PIE CHART WE HAVE THE
FUNDS BROKEN DOWN INTO HOW WE
SPEND THOSE DOLLARS.
SO WE ARE WE HAVE A TOTAL
EXPENSE BUDGET OF TWENTY FOUR
POINT SEVEN MILLION DOLLARS AND
IT'S BROKEN DOWN INTO THESE
CATEGORIES.
YOU CAN SEE THE LARGEST
CATEGORY BY FAR IS THE RIGHT
OF WAY MAINTENANCE AND THAT
ACCOUNTS FOR OBVIOUSLY
MAINTENANCE THAT OCCURS IN THE
RIGHT OF WAY.
IT INCLUDES THINGS LIKE SNOW
REMOVAL, SWEEPING POTHOLE
FILLING ROAD CAPITAL
MAINTENANCE.
IT ALSO INCLUDES ACTIVITIES WE
DO AS FAR AS MAINTAINING
CROSSWALKS THAT ARE IN THE
RIGHT OF WAY TRAFFIC ISLANDS,
ANYTHING THAT'S IN THE RIGHT
AWAY THAT REQUIRES MAINTENANCE
IS HANDLED IN THIS AREA AND THE
NEXT LARGEST CATEGORY WHICH IS
THE ORANGE CATEGORY OF JUST
OVER FOUR POINT THREE DOLLARS
BILLION IS WHAT IS REFERRED TO
AS TRAFFIC CONTROL AND THOSE
ARE THE TYPES OF THINGS IN THE
RIGHT AWAY THAT OBVIOUSLY
CONTROL TRAFFIC.
>> SO THOSE WOULD BE TRAFFIC
SIGNALS BOTH PEDESTRIAN AND
VEHICULAR AS WELL AS SIGNAGE,
BOTH PEDESTRIAN VEHICULAR, EVEN
PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND PAINTINGS
,ROADS THAT CONTROL TRAFFIC
AND PARKING THOSE ARE FUNDED
OUT OF THIS CATEGORY.
>> WE HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF DEBT
SERVICE IN THIS FUND, THIS
SLICE OF PIE HERE IN THE YELLOW
DEBT JUST OVER EIGHT HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT
SPECIFICALLY IS THE AMOUNT
OF FIFTY ONE REVENUE THAT IS
SENT OVER AND PASSED OUT AND
SENT TO THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND.
AND WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT A
LITTLE BIT MORE ON THE NEXT
SLIDE.
AND THEN FINALLY THIS OTHER
CATCH ALL CATEGORY REPRESENTS
SOME ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS AS
WELL AS SOME ANCILLARY COST,
INTERNAL COSTS, MUNICIPAL
SERVICE CHARGE.
THINGS OF THAT NATURE ARE IN
THIS CATEGORY ALONG WITH THINGS
LIKE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING.
>> SEE WHAT IS IN THEIR SYSTEMS
PLANNING, ASSET MANAGEMENT,
THOSE TYPE OF THINGS ARE IN
THIS CATEGORY HERE AS PROMISED
NEXT.
MOVING ON TO THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND THIS IS
REALLY A SUBSET OF THE FIFTY
ONE FUNDS WHAT ACTIVITY ONE
REQUIRES US TO SPEND ONE
PERCENT OF OUR ANNUAL
ALLOCATION ON ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS IN THE
CITY OVERALL FAR, FAR EXCEEDS
THAT AMOUNT YOU CAN SEE HERE IS
THE TRAJECTORY OF THE THE
TRANSFER THAT CAME INTO THIS
FUND LOCAL AND MAJOR STREET
FUNDS AGAIN REPRESENTED BY THE
BLUE AND THE ORANGE.
THIS OUTLIER HERE IN FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY ONE WAS AN INCREASE
THAT WAS NECESSARY DUE TO THE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT THAT
OCCURRED AT THE ALLEN CREEK
AREA WHERE A PEDESTRIAN TUNNEL
WAS INSERTED.
>> SO THE FUND HAD TO BE INFLUX
WITH DOLLARS COMING FROM A
MAJOR LOCAL STREET FUND.
SO WE DID SEND OVER AN
ADDITIONAL MILLION DOLLARS TO
GET THAT PROJECT UP.
AND YOU CAN SEE AGAIN IT'S IT'S
GONE UP SLIGHTLY OVER TIME AND
AGAIN KIND OF REMAINING FLAT
BUT JUST OVER EIGHT HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS COMES INTO
THIS FUND.
NOW WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
EXPENDITURES IN THIS FUND AGAIN
WE HAVE THE PIE REPRESENTATION
TO SHOW YOU HOW WE'RE SPENDING
THIS DOLLAR.
BUT WHAT I WOULD SAY TO YOU IS
WHEN WE DO MAINTENANCE AND IN
FIFTY ONE IN THE PREVIOUS SLIDE
IT INCLUDES ANYTHING THAT IS IN
THE ROADWAY, BE IT MOTORIZED OR
NON MOTORIZED IN THIS FUND IT
WOULD BE STRICTLY AN ALLOCATION
OF MAINTENANCE OR CAPITAL THAT
INVOLVES ONLY THE NON MOTORIZED
PORTION.
SO FOR INSTANCE THE PROTECTED
PROTECTED BIKE LANES THAT
REQUIRE SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE OR
EQUIPMENT OR SPECIAL LABOR
THOSE GET EXPENSED IN THIS FUND
AND THEY'RE NOT COMMINGLED WITH
THE PREVIOUS FUNDS THAT WE
TALKED ABOUT
MOVING ON ANOTHER
FUND THAT WE SEE SIGNIFICANT
EXPENDITURE FOR TRANSPORTATION
AND ROAD EXPENDITURES IS STREET
BRIDGE AND SIDEWALK MILEAGE,
WHICH IS A LONG STANDING
MILLAGE THAT THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR HAS BEEN FORTUNATE ENOUGH
TO HAVE.
WE ARE THE VILLAGE ITSELF.
SEE THIS FISCAL YEAR IS
GENERATING FIFTEEN MILLION
DOLLARS SO YOU CAN SEE HERE
IT'S REPRESENTED BY THE BLUE
THAT'S THE ACTUAL OPERATING
STREET MILEAGE AND THEN WE HAVE
TRANSFERS FROM OTHER FUNDS TO
COVER THEIR FAIR PORTION OF THE
SPECIFIC PROJECTS INVESTMENT
INCOME AND CONSTRUCTION
REIMBURSEMENT.
>> SO IF YOU LOOK AT FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY OR YOU SEE AN
OUTLIER THE REASON FROM THAT IS
WE HAVE SEVERAL PROJECTS
UNDERWAY THAT INVOLVE OTHER
FUNDING SOURCES WITHIN THE
CITY.
FOR INSTANCE, UTILITY FUNDS IF
WE'RE RIPPING UP THE ROAD WE'LL
ADDRESS THE UTILITIES AT THE
SAME TIME THOSE UTILITY FUNDS
WILL CONTRIBUTE THEIR FAIR
SHARE COST TO THAT FUND SO THE
PROJECT CAN BE COMPLETED.
THEN THIS PIECE UP HERE IN THE
BLUE IS REPRESENTING
CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENTS WE
ARE ANTICIPATING FROM PARTNERS
THAT WE ENGAGE IN PROJECTS WITH
SO THE MOST RECENT PROJECT THAT
WE HAVE UNDERWAY IS MEDICAL
CENTER BRIDGE PROJECT.
SO THE UNIVERSITY SHARE OF THE
PROJECT IS COMING IN IS A
REVENUE WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
EXPANSION EXPENDITURE SIDE
OF THE BUDGET WE'RE EXPECTING
TO SPEND TWENTY FOUR MILLION
DOLLARS OUT OF THE STREET OR
SIDEWALK MILEAGE IN FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FIVE AND AGAIN BROKEN
DOWN BY THE CATEGORIES
INDICATED HERE THE LARGEST
CATEGORY HERE OUT OF THIS FUND
IS THE ANNUAL STREET
RESURFACING
OVER TEN MILLION
DOLLARS IS PLANNED FOR THIS
UPCOMING CYCLE.
THE NEXT LARGE CATEGORY IS
ANNUAL CAPITAL MAINTENANCE.
YOU CAN ALSO SEE HERE THIS
PARTICULAR SLICE IS THE PROJECT
THAT I MENTIONED THE EAST
MEDICAL CENTER BRIDGE PROJECT
WHICH IS OVER FIVE AND A HALF
MILLION DOLLARS THIS UPCOMING
BUDGET CYCLE IN ADDITION TO
THOSE SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS, WE
HAVE THREE OTHER VILLAGES
WITHIN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
THAT HAVE PORTIONS OF THAT
MILLAGE ALLOCATED TOWARDS
TRANSPORTATION ACTIVITIES.
THE FIRST IS THE COUNTY MENTAL
HEALTH MILLAGE.
>> TWENTY PERCENT OF THAT
VILLAGE IS ALLOCATED TO
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY WHICH
ACCOUNTS FOR FIVE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS
IN THE UPCOMING BUDGET.
THAT'S FIVE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS WILL
FUND THE THREE PROGRAMS LISTED
THERE A PORTION OF THE
STREETLIGHT REPLACEMENT PROGRAM
CROSSWALK AND LIGHTING UPGRADES
AND THEN JUST UNDER THREE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN
TRAFFIC CALMING FUNDING FOR THE
UPCOMING CYCLE.
NEXT WE HAVE A PARTICULAR
VILLAGE THAT IS STRICTLY SET
ASIDE FOR START SIDEWALK
CONSTRUCTION OR SIDEWALK GAP
FILLING THAT MILLAGE GENERATES
ABOUT TWO POINT THREE DOLLARS
MILLION ANNUALLY AND THE
PROJECTS LISTED THERE ARE WHAT
ENGINEERING HAS PLANNED FOR THE
UPCOMING CYCLE AND FINALLY THE
CLIMATE ACTION MILLAGE THAT IS
ALSO A WONDERFUL MILLAGE WHICH
GENERATES JUST OVER SEVEN
MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR AND
SEVEN HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS
OF THAT MILLION HAS BEEN
ALLOCATED TO THE TRANSPORTATION
PROGRAMS LISTED BELOW CROSSWALK
UPGRADES, STREET LIGHTING
UPGRADES IN BIKE INFRASTRUCTURE
.
>> THIS NEXT SLIDE REPRESENTS
JUST REALLY A LIST
OF EVERYTHING WE HAVE INCLUDED
IN THE BUDGET.
I SHOULDN'T SAY EVERYTHING THE
MAJOR PROGRAMS WE HAVE INCLUDED
IN THE BUDGET THAT ARE IN
REGARDS TO ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION IN THE VARIOUS
FUNDING POTS.
SO I THINK WE COVERED MOST
OF THESE ITEMS WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF THE ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS WE HAVE ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE BUDGET
THAT ADDS TO TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT WE
ALREADY HAD ALLOCATED TO THIS
PROGRAM AND IT IS ALSO PLUGGED
INTO THE PLAN FOR ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS ALLOCATION
EACH YEAR WHICH IS INTENDED TO
DO THE CITY OF REVIEWING EACH
OF THE ROADS WITHIN THE CITY TO
DETERMINE IF THEY ARE RIPE FOR
ROAD.
DIETZE WE ALSO HAVE SOME
FUNDING THAT IS BEING ANNUALLY
SET ASIDE FOR ACCESSIBLE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AND THAT
PROGRAM HAS BEEN UNDERWAY ALSO
FOR SEVERAL YEARS THAT HAS AN
ALLOCATION IN THE ANNUAL PLAN
FOR A FEW MORE YEARS TO GET ALL
THOSE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS
INSTALLED.
>> THE SIDEWALK REPAIR PROGRAM
IS AN ANNUAL PROGRAM THAT GOES
THROUGH CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE
CITY AND CORRECT SIDEWALK
ISSUES THERE AGAIN WE HAVE
CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS, FUNDING
AND IN VARIOUS FUNDING SOURCES
FOR A TOTAL OF EIGHT HUNDRED
AND FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS AS
WELL AS THIS NON MOTORIZED
INFRASTRUCTURE AGAIN IN VARIOUS
FUNDING SPOTS THAT TOTALS SEVEN
HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
>> SO WHAT WE COULD PIECE OUT
IS LIKE SIX POINT THREE MILLION
DOLLARS BUT AS I TRIED TO
EXPLAIN PREVIOUSLY, IT IS NOT
REPRESENTATIVE WHAT WE SPEND IN
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS.
IT'S JUST WHAT WE COULD PIECE
OUT EASILY.
>> WE ALSO HAVE GRANT PROCEEDS
THAT ARE CURRENTLY UNDERWAY.
THE AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN WAS
ALLOCATED TWO MILLION DOLLARS.
>> TWENTY FOUR MILLION DOLLARS
ARE ALLOCATED TO THE VISION
ZERO IMPLEMENTATION TO DATE
WE'VE COMMITTED SIX HUNDRED
FIFTY THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS
OF THAT TWO MILLION DOLLARS.
ALL OF THAT MONEY MUST BE SPENT
BY DECEMBER THIRTY FIRST
OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX.
SO WE ARE MOVING ALONG WITH
THAT PROJECT AS WELL AS THE US
DOT GRANT OF SAFE STREETS AND
ROADS WHICH IS AT THREE POINT
EIGHT MILLION DOLLARS.
THAT GRANT AGREEMENT HAS
FINALLY BEEN FINALIZED AND WORK
IS PROCEEDING THERE.
>> IN ADDITION WE ARE IN YEAR
THREE OF THIS CITY'S ISSUED
ROAD BOND THAT IT WAS TO
ADDRESS STREET REPAIRS.
THERE IS WORK PLANNED EACH
OF THE FIVE WORDS FOR THE
UPCOMING CYCLE THAT WILL
EXHAUST THE FUNDS THAT WE
ISSUED FOR THE ROAD BOND AND WE
HAVE MOVED THE SCALE ON THE
CONDITIONS OF THE ROAD SYSTEM.
WE ALSO HAVE IMPROVEMENTS
PLANNED FOR THIS UPCOMING CYCLE
IN OUR SNOW OPERATION IMPROVE
PERFORMANCE.
>> WE ARE EXPANDING THE
FUNCTIONALITY OF THE EQUIPMENT.
WE CONTINUE TO FUND OUR
SIDEWALK VOLUNTEER SNOW REMOVAL
PROGRAM FOR THOSE WHO HAVE
TROUBLE CLEARING THEIR OWN
SIDEWALKS.
WE ARE AGAIN PURCHASING ANOTHER
BIKE LANE PIECE OF EQUIPMENT SO
THIS PIECE OF EQUIPMENT WILL
SPECIFICALLY BE USED FOR SNOW
REMOVAL AND BIKE LANES.
WE ALSO INTEND TO CONTRACT FOR
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT WITH LOCAL
STREET AND REFUGE AND SNOW
CLEARING DURING THE WINTER.
OUR CREWS CURRENTLY FOCUS THEIR
EFFORTS ON KEEPING THE MAJOR
ROADS CLEAR AS OUR CITY CREWS
ARE DOING THAT WE WILL HAVE A
CONTRACTOR ON RETAINER TO BEGIN
WORK IN THE LOCAL STREET SYSTEM
ALONG WITH REFUGE ISLAND
CLEARANCE AND THEN ONCE THE
CITY CREWS HAVE FINISHED UP ON
THE MAJORS THEY'LL MOVE OVER TO
THE LOCAL STREETS TO ASSIST
WITH THE THE CONTRACTORS WE
HAVE ON RETAINER.
THAT CONCLUDES WHAT I HAVE TO
SHARE WITH YOU.
BUT IF YOU HAVE SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS I AM HAPPY TO ANSWER
THEM.
>> ALL RIGHT.
IF THERE'S ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT
MS.
ERGA, THANK SO MUCH MORE
DETAILED PRESENTATION ON THE
TRANSPORTATION THAN WE HAVE AT
THE BUDGET MEETING ON MONDAY.
SO THANK YOU AND I'M PROBABLY
GOING TO BE DIGGING INTO THIS
MORE AND CURIOUS TO HEAR
PEOPLE'S COMMENTS ON THIS BUT
ON THE ROAD DIET COMPONENT YOU
MENTIONED THAT BUT IF YOU COULD
YOU MENTIONED THAT IT DOES
ADVANCE COUNCIL'S RESOLUTION
AROUND LOOKING AT
RECONFIGURATIONS AND
MAGISTRATES.
BUT IF YOU COULD TALK A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT THAT AND THEN
ALSO IF IT'S ALSO CRUDITES IN
OTHER SPOTS AS WELL.
>> RIGHT.
SO I THE SPECIFIC THE PLANS I'D
HAVE TO REFER TO RAYMONDE BUT I
CAN TELL YOU FINANCIALLY IT IS
IN THE ANNUAL CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AS AN
ALLOCATION OF ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS I BELIEVE
THROUGH FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
NINE.
I BELIEVE THAT THE COSTS WE
HAVE ESTIMATED ARE IN TOTAL TO
DO A REVIEW OF ALL THE ROADS
EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS SO WE'RE
FUNDING IT ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
ANNUALLY UNTIL THAT WORK IS
DONE THROUGH TWENTY NINE SO
WE'LL JUST KEEP ADDING TO THE
EXISTING ALLOCATIONS.
WOULDN'T THAT ADD UP TO FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS I
SUPPOSE BUT WE FUNDED IT IN
TWENTY TO TWENTY FOUR AND
TWENTY IN PROPOSING IN TWENTY
FIVE SO THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS TO DATE OK YEAH I GUESS
I'M THINKING AT THE OH THEN
EIGHT FIFTY HERE THAT'S WHAT IS
IN CAPITAL PLAN SO IT'S IN
THERE AT ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS AND THEN THE FINAL YEAR
FIFTY I BELIEVE OK AND THEN
RAYMOND THIS MAY BE MORE OF A
QUESTION FOR YOU IF YOU MIGHT
JUST BE ABLE TO SPEAK A LITTLE
BIT AROUND JUST SPECIFICALLY
WHAT ELEMENTS YOU FEEL LIKE
FROM THE TRANSPORT OR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT THAT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN ANTICIPATED FOR
THIS COMING YEAR.
HOW ARE WE DOING IN TERMS
OF PROGRESS TOWARDS THOSE GOALS
WITH THE LINE UP OF THIS
BUDGET?
WHICH WHICH AREAS DO WE FEEL
LIKE WE'RE REALLY MAKING
HEADWAY ON THIS YEAR?
ARE THERE SOME AREAS THAT WE
HAVEN'T?
>> YEAH, GOOD QUESTION.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE FEEL VERY FORTUNATE ABOUT IS
SOME OF THE SUPPLEMENTAL GRANT
FUNDING.
SO MARTY MENTIONED THE AMERICAN
RESCUE PLAN ACT FUNDING IRTPA.
WE WERE ALLOCATED TWO MILLION
OF THAT.
WE'VE GONE THROUGH ROUGHLY A
QUARTER OF IT, ALMOST ALL THE
REMAINDER AND DON'T TAKE THAT
LITERALLY BUT MOST OF THE
REMAINDER WILL GO TOWARDS THE
MILLER STREET PROJECT AND ALL
OF THE NON MOTORIZED COMPONENTS
THEN MARTY ALSO MENTIONED THE
SAFE STREETS FOR ALL GRANT THE
FEDERAL GRANT PORTION IS THREE
POINT EIGHT MILLION BUT THEN
THERE'S A LOCAL MATCH UP I NINE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND SO
WE HAVE FOUR MILLION PLUS
DOLLAR PACKAGE OF PROJECTS THAT
WE'RE PUTTING TOGETHER.
AN RFP JUST WENT OUT ON THE
STREETS TO GET A CONSULTANT TO
HELP US MANAGE, PROVIDE
OVERSIGHT, HELP IDENTIFY
PROJECTS AND MOVE ALL OF THAT
FORWARD.
SO EXCITED ABOUT THAT.
WE ALSO ARE FINALIZING A
CONTRACT FOR NEAR MISS
ANALYTICS.
SO THIS WOULD BE AGAIN LOOKING
AT CLOSE CALLS WITHIN THE
COMMUNITY SUPPLEMENTING OUR
CRASH DATA, REALLY HAVING A
BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT'S
HAPPENING AT OUR INTERSECTIONS
.
SO I THINK THAT PROGRAM FOUR
MILLION DOLLAR INFUSION
OF ADDITIONAL FUNDING IS REALLY
GOING TO ADVANCE A LOT
OF THINGS LIKE SPEED MANAGEMENT
AND OUR QUICK BUILDS.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, YOU'VE BEEN
HEARING ME TALK ABOUT TAKING
ALL OF OUR EXISTING BUFFORD
BIKE LANES AND UPGRADING THOSE
TO PROTECTED BIKE LANES THAT
WILL BE IMPLEMENTED THROUGH
SAFE STREETS FOR ALL GROUP.
WE ACTUALLY ARE SUBMITTING NEPA
DOCUMENTS TO FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION TO MAKE SURE
THAT IT MEETS ALL ENVIRONMENTAL
CLEARANCES AND THEN THE LAST
SUPPLEMENTAL FUNDING THAT I
REALLY LIKE TO HIGHLIGHT IS THE
CLIMATE ACTION MILLICH AGAIN,
KUDOS TO THE CITY AND THE
RESIDENTS OF ANN ARBOR THAT
SUPPORTED THIS.
THERE IS A CARVE OUT
FOR
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
LIKE MARTY MENTIONED, WE ARE
USING THAT AS A MATCH FOR A LOT
OF THESE OTHER INITIATIVES.
SO CLIMATE VILLAGE IS LARGELY
GOING TO MATCH THAT SAFE
STREETS PROGRAM.
IT'S ALSO GOING TO MATCH SOME
OF THE CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM
FUNDS THAT WE GOT A YEAR AGO
FROM SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN COUNCIL
OF GOVERNMENTS.
SO IT'S NICE TO HAVE SORT
OF THAT UNENCUMBERED SORT
OF AND THAT'S NOT REALLY THE
RIGHT WORD THAT PROBABLY USE
OF THAT PROBABLY MADE MARTY
CRINGE A LITTLE BIT.
BUT YOU KNOW, THIS SORT
OF FUNDING SOURCE THAT WE CAN
USE TO HELP LEVERAGE OTHER
GRANT OPPORTUNITIES AND SO
QUITE FRANKLY, I MEAN WITH OUR
SMALL MINDED TEAM OF FIVE
PEOPLE, WE'RE DOING EVERYTHING
WE CAN TO JUST ADVANCE THOSE
EXISTING PROGRAMS AS BEST WE
CAN.
AND SO I THINK IS THERE MORE
THAT COULD BE DONE?
I'M SURE THERE'S ALWAYS MORE
THAT CAN BE DONE.
COULD WE ABSORB THAT WITH THE
CAPACITY WE HAVE?
PROBABLY NOT.
IT WOULD BE VERY DIFFICULT FOR
US TO TAKE ON ADDITIONAL
PROJECTS GIVEN ALL THE THINGS
WE'RE JUGGLING RIGHT NOW.
SO THE GOOD NEWS IS YOU CAN
HEAR ME SAY IT FOR A WHILE.
I DO EXPECT TO START SEEING
SOME VERY BIG TRANSFORMATIONAL
PROJECTS THIS YEAR.
MILLER OUR PROJECT FOR EXAMPLE,
IS GOING TO INCORPORATE IN USPI
MANAGEMENT ELEMENTS AT LEAST
THAT'S THE THE DESIGN THAT WE
HAVE OUT ON THE STREETS RIGHT
NOW FOR BID.
AND THEN EVEN AS WE MOVE INTO
THINGS LIKE THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND SOME
OF THESE QUICK BUILDS AND
TAKING ALL THOSE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES LIKE 11 MILES OF BIKE
LANES AND PROTECTING THEM, IT'S
GOING TO BE FAIRLY
TRANSFORMATIONAL.
SO SO YEAH, THERE'S A LOT ON
OUR PLATE I THINK I THINK WE'RE
EXCITED ABOUT SOME OF THESE
OPPORTUNITIES AND AND YEAH, I'M
I'M PRETTY EXCITED ABOUT HOW
THE BUDGET SHAKING OUT
SUPPORTING THE WORK THAT WE'RE
DOING AND THEN JUST ONE MORE
QUESTION FOR ME IF YOU MIGHT TO
SPEAK A LITTLE BIT.
THERE'S A FAIR AMOUNT
OF FUNDING IN THERE FOR
STREETLIGHTS, REPLACEMENTS AND
JUST OBVIOUSLY THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT IS CALLED OUT A
LITTLE BIT IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN BUT IT'S
NOT IT'S I GUESS JUST SPEAKING
A LITTLE BIT TO KIND OF THE
FUNDING NEEDS AROUND THAT OR
KIND OF I'M NOT SURE CALLED OUT
QUITE TO THE DEGREE THAT MAYBE
THIS FUNDING MIGHT SUGGEST BUT
THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL TO SPEAK
A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT ABOUT
THE NEED AROUND THAT.
>> YEAH, THERE'S THERE'S A GOOD
CLARIFICATION.
THAT'S PROBABLY ONE OF THERE
SOME OF THAT FUNDING THAT MARTY
HIGHLIGHTED IS DEDICATED TO
INSTALLATION OF NEW
STREETLIGHTS IN PARTICULAR WE
FOCUS MOST OF OUR NEW
STREETLIGHTS ON PROVIDING
POSITIVE CONTRAST LIGHTING AT
CROSSWALKS.
RIGHT.
SO THERE'S A CROSSWALK THAT
DOESN'T HAVE SUFFICIENT
LIGHTING.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE GET IN
THERE AND DO THAT.
WE'VE BEEN KIND OF GOING
THROUGH THAT LIST FOR A WHILE.
WE MADE A LOT OF PROGRESS.
THERE'S STILL A FEW ON THE LIST
THAT WE NEED TO GET THROUGH AND
WE HOPE TO DO THAT.
THE REPLACEMENT PROGRAM, THE
FIRST BULLET ON THE SLIDE THAT
YOU SEE BEFORE YOU LIGHT
REPLACEMENT OF FIVE HUNDRED AND
THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS.
THIS IS CAPITAL PREVENTIVE
MAINTENANCE.
BUT OFTENTIMES YOU THINK
OF THAT IN TERMS OF STREET
RESURFACING.
THIS IS ACTUALLY RELATED TO OUR
STREET LIGHT ASSETS.
SO A LOT OF OUR STREETLIGHTS IN
TOWN ARE DECADES OLD AND SO WE
HAVE AN ASSET MANAGEMENT PLAN
THAT GOES THROUGH AND
IDENTIFIES THE CONDITION OF THE
LUMINAIRES THE FIXTURE AS WELL
AS THE POLE AND IF ANY PIECES
OF THOSE LOOK LIKE THEY'RE
NEARING THE END OF THEIR USEFUL
LIFE, WE DON'T WANT TO WAIT FOR
THE POLE TO FALL OVER FOR THE
LIGHT TO BURN OUT.
WE GO AHEAD AND PROACTIVELY
REPLACE THAT.
THAT PROJECT IS CURRENTLY UNDER
DESIGN.
WE HAVE A CONSULTANT BUILDING
DETECTOR THAT IS GOING THROUGH
THE ASSET MANAGEMENT PLAN AND
IDENTIFYING A PROGRAM
OF IMPROVEMENTS.
THEY'RE GOING TO PUT TOGETHER A
BIG PACKAGE WITH THE ASSISTANCE
OF STAFF AND THEN WE HOPE TO
PUT THAT BID PACKAGE OUT ON THE
STREETS FOR AN RFP OR BID LATER
THIS YEAR AND THEN THEY WOULD
GO AROUND AND MAKE A LOT
OF IMPROVEMENTS TO
STREETLIGHTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, JUST AS ONE
EXAMPLE THERE ARE SOME VERY
OUTDATED STREETLIGHTS DOWNTOWN.
I'M SURE MANY OF YOU'RE
FAMILIAR WITH KIND OF THE GLOBE
FIXTURES BUT THERE ARE A COUPLE
FIXTURES IS I FORGET WHICH
STREET THEY'RE ON.
THEY'RE KIND OF ON THE EAST
SIDE OF DOWNTOWN THAT WE CALL
THE FLYING SAUCERS.
THEY'RE THIS VERY PECULIAR
LUMINAIRES THAT SHOOTS OUT A
LITTLE SHIELD THAT BOUNCES IT
BACK DOWN.
WE NO LONGER SUPPORT THAT
LIGHT.
WE CAN'T EVEN FIND PARTS FOR
IT.
SO THAT WOULD BE A STYLE
OF LIGHT THAT WOULD BE UP FOR
REPLACEMENT THROUGH THAT FIVE
HUNDRED AND THIRTY THOUSAND
DOLLAR CAPITAL PREVENTIVE
MAINTENANCE PROJECT THANKS TO
ME TO BE CLEAR ABOUT THAT FIVE
THIRTY SO FOUR HUNDRED TWENTY
FIVE THAT FIVE THIRTY COMES
FROM THE GENERAL FUND AND ONE
HUNDRED AND FIVE COMES FROM THE
COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH VILLAGE.
THE TWENTY PERCENT AND I KNOW
WE DID SOME SURVEY WORK AND
WE'RE TRYING AROUND SORT OF THE
LUMINAIRES AND THE LIGHTING
COMPONENT OF IT FOR AS
SENSITIVE AS WE CAN TOWARDS THE
DARK SKIES.
WE THERE'S THOSE TENDENCIES CAN
BE PUT IN REALLY LIGHT BULBS
THAT ARE PINK NECESSARILY
STRONG.
>> WE'LL TALK ABOUT IF I MAY
EVEN UNPACK THAT A LITTLE
FURTHER.
>> THAT'S ACTUALLY A DIFFERENT
PROJECT WHERE WE ARE TRYING TO
GET UNDER CONTRACT WITH DTT TO
UPGRADE ALL OF THEIR HIGH
PRESSURE SODIUM INEFFICIENT
LIGHTS TO A MORE EFFICIENT LED
LIGHT BUT ONE THAT ISN'T AS
BRIGHT AS THEIR STANDARD
OFFERING.
THEY TYPICALLY USE A VERY
BRIGHT LIGHT BOTH IN TERMS
OF COLOR, TEMPERATURE AND
WATTAGE.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO GET
SOMETHING A LITTLE BIT SOFTER
AND THAT IS FUNDED THROUGH
HINTED AT AT A MOMENT AGO THE
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM GRANT
THAT WE GOT WE GOT ROUGHLY NINE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS GRANT
FROM SOME KOG THAT IS GOING TO
HELP PAY FOR ALL THE BACK
CONVERSION.
SO AND IN THEORY MIGHT EVEN
REDUCE SOME OF THE CITY'S BILLS
BECAUSE LEDS COME IN AT A LOWER
BILLING CURRENTLY EVEN THOUGH
THERE'S TALK THAT THEY MAY TRY
TO CHANGE THAT FOR MPAC.
WELL WE'LL SEE HOW THAT SHAKES
OUT.
>> I HAD A QUESTION ABOUT THE
COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH MILLICH
REFUND I GUESS THAT WE GET AND
WHAT WE GET CURRENTLY 20
PERCENT OF THAT THAT COMES TO
THE CITY THE THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND GETS TWENTY
PERCENT I'VE HEARD TALK ABOUT
THAT FORTY FORTY TWENTY MAYBE
CHANGING IN THE FUTURE.
DO YOU KNOW ABOUT THE
RELIABILITY OF THAT TWENTY
PERCENT IT'S OVER BETWEEN FIVE
HUNDRED AND SIX HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS THIS YEAR.
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT
TRANSPORTATION NEEDS TO I DON'T
KNOW START PLANNING FOR FOR
THAT MAYBE CHANGE IN THE
FUTURE?
THAT MIGHT BE A QUESTION FOR
ERIKA ACTUALLY I DON'T KNOW IT
IS A A COUNCIL DECISION IN
TERMS OF HOW THAT ALLOCATION IS
CORRECT AND IF I'M WRONG ON
THIS ALREADY BUT IN TERMS
OF HOW WE'VE SPLIT UP THAT THAT
FORTY FORTY FUNDING, OBVIOUSLY
YOU CAN SEE THAT WE'RE USING
THAT TWENTY PERCENT PRETTY
PRODUCTIVELY WHEN IT COMES TO
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY.
SO I THINK THE ONLY REASON THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION MIGHT
WANT TO GET INVOLVED IS IF THAT
IS A SOMETHING THAT YOU WOULD
LIKE TO SEE CONTINUE.
SO YOU'RE SAYING THAT WE NEED
TO TAKE ACTION AND ACTION TO
PROMOTE THE CONTINUANCE OF THAT
OR I'M SAYING THAT I AM SAYING
THAT IS A IT CERTAINLY COULD BE
A POINT OF DEBATE FUTURE DEBATE
AS TO HOW THAT FUNDING GETS
USED AND HOW IT GETS
REALLOCATED AND CERTAINLY
BROUGHT THAT UP AS A POINT THAT
A LOT OF THESE HOW WE SPLIT UP
THAT FUNDING WE NOW HAVE
MILEAGES THAT THAT COVER SOME
OF THESE DIFFERENT AREAS AND SO
QUESTION OF WHETHER OR NOT SOME
OF THOSE ALLOCATIONS THAT HAVE
BEEN COMMITTED TO BY RESOLUTION
PREVIOUSLY THEY SHOULD BE WE
SHOULD RECONSIDER IT WITHIN
THIS BUDGET FRAMEWORK.
AND SO I THINK THERE'S
CERTAINLY AN OPPORTUNITY TO
THAT OTHERS MIGHT BE THINKING
ABOUT THOSE FUNDS AND IF THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT THOSE WHO ARE
INTERESTED IN TRANSPORTATION
ARE INTERESTED IN SEEING MOVE
FORWARD, IT'S CERTAINLY
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK UP.
>> LOOK THERE ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS
OR I SAY
NONE AS ALWAYS.
THANK YOU, MARTY.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU EVERY
EVERY SPRING.
THANKS FOR COMING BY AGAIN.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
HAVE A GOOD EVENING.
THANKS TO ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS THE GET DOWN TOWN
UPDATE TO GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM
IS PART OF THE RIDE AND
PROVIDES IMPORTANT
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES LIKE
THE GO PASS FOR TRANSIT.
SO WE'RE JOINED THIS EVENING BY
LILLIAN WEBB WHO WILL GIVE A
PRESENTATION AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS.
I MEAN HELLO.
I HELLO.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
I DO HOPE TO SUCCESSFULLY SHARE
MY SCREEN IN JUST A SECOND OR
SO.
>> LET'S GO TO COOL.
WELL I AM THRILLED TO COME BACK
AND CHAT WITH YOU GUYS.
I FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO WHO WERE
HERE LAST YEAR LAST SPRING I
DID A QUICK UPDATE ON THE GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM WHICH REALLY
WAS MORE OF A REFRESHER SINCE
THE PROGRAM DID HAVE SOME
CHANGES IN STAFF AS WELL AS A
LITTLE BIT OF A REBUILDING
PERIOD IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
BUT I'M HAPPY TO KIND OF RECAP
WHAT'S HAPPENED SINCE I LAST
SAW YOU AND SAVE SOME TIME AT
THE END FOR ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU MAY HAVE.
SO LET'S GET INTO IT SO I DON'T
EXPECT YOU ALL TO REMEMBER HAVE
TOP OF MIND WHAT EXACTLY THE
GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM IS.
YOU DO HAVE THAT LITTLE BLURB
IN THE STUDY GUIDE BUT WE ARE A
PROGRAM FOCUSED ON PROVIDING
SERVICES TO EMPLOYEES AND
EMPLOYERS ABOUT GETTING TO WORK
PRIMARILY FOCUSED IN THE
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR AREA BECAUSE
OF OUR PARTNERSHIP AND MAJOR
ROLE OF THE ANN ARBOR DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY IN
CONTINUING TO FUND AND SUPPORT
THE PROGRAM.
SO THE THE THREE PARTNERS
CURRENTLY ARE THE RIDE AND THE
ANN ARBOR DAY AND THEN WITH THE
CITY
OF ANN ARBOR I WORK MOST
CLOSELY WITH THE TRANSPORTATION
DEPARTMENT BUT ALSO HAVING GOOD
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION AS THE MESSAGES OR
THE GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM ARE
CERTAINLY ABOUT USING
ALTERNATIVES TO DRIVING ALONE.
BUT THOSE ARE ALSO FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION THAT ALSO
HAVE TEND TO BE VERY
SUSTAINABLE.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF OVERLAP
THERE WITH OUR OUR WORK AND OUR
COMMUNICATION.
SO SINCE IN THE LAST YEAR I'LL
GO INTO THESE A LITTLE BIT MORE
ON THE NEXT COUPLE OF SLIDES
BUT VERY HIGH LEVEL KIND
OF THREE BUCKETS.
WE HAD JUST COMPLETED A A
SURVEY THAT HAD A COUPLE
OF POINTS BUT SURVEY
OF DOWNTOWN COMMUTERS AND WE
HAVE A DECISION MAKER SURVEY
THAT ASKS A FEW DIFFERENT
QUESTIONS ABOUT FROM EMPLOYERS
ABOUT HOW THEY INCENTIVIZING
PEOPLE TO GET TO WORK WITHOUT
USING THEIR CARS AGAIN OPEN TO
ANN ARBOR AS A WHOLE BUT
DEFINITELY FOCUSED ON DOWNTOWN
AND WOULD BE HAPPY TO SHARE HOW
THAT WENT.
WE DID THREE MORE CHALLENGES TO
HELP AMPLIFY AND REWARD PEOPLE
FOR CHOOSING THOSE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION METHODS AND THEN
WITH THE GO PASS PROGRAM, WHICH
IS A PROGRAM FUNDED BY THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
FOR DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR
EMPLOYEES ALLOWING THEM TO GET
TO WORK WITHOUT NEEDING TO USE
THEIR THEIR CAR TO DRIVE ALL
THE WAY DOWNTOWN, USE THE
PARKING GARAGES, FOLKS CAN HOP
ON THE BUS FROM THEIR HOME OR
USE A PARK OR RIDE A LOT AND
THE DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY PICKS UP THE THE FEE
FOR THAT THE FARE FOR THAT.
SO TALKING FIRST ABOUT THE
SURVEY, THIS IS A SLIDE
ESSENTIALLY DIRECTLY FROM THE
FROM THE THE SURVEY TEAM THAT
WE WORK WITH AT LEVEL SEVEN.
BUT WE DID HAVE A REALLY GOOD
RESPONSE FROM EMPLOYERS.
WE HAD A LITTLE FEWER RESPONSES
FROM COMMUTERS AND WE HAD HOPE.
WE THINK PART OF THAT IS JUST
PEOPLE DIDN'T REALLY IDENTIFY
AS COMMUTERS WHEN WE HAVE FOLKS
TELEWORKING MORE THAN THEY WERE
IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN WHICH WAS
THE LAST TIME THE SURVEY WAS
DONE, IT JUST MIGHT NOT BE TOP
OF THEIR MIND AND WE HAD TO
REBUILD A LOT OF RELATIONSHIPS
BUT WHAT WE DID GET OUT OF THE
SURVEY WAS LEARNING SOME WAYS
THAT WE COULD BETTER
COMMUNICATE WITH OUR COMMUNITY
ON.
THEY JUST WEREN'T GETTING THE
INFORMATION.
THE COMMUTERS WE DID HEAR FROM
WE'RE NOT GETTING INFORMATION.
WE KNOW EMPLOYERS ARE A MAJOR
SOURCE OF INFORMATION.
EMPLOYERS DON'T NECESSARILY
FEEL IT WAS A PRIORITY
UNDERSTANDABLY SO.
AND A LOT OF CASES GIVEN WHAT
THEY WERE GOING THROUGH OVER
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS BUT WE
WANTED TO GET BACK ON THEIR
RADAR SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON
ADJUSTING OUR COMMUNICATIONS
AND WHAT WE ARE OFFERING TO OUR
COMMUNITY MEMBERS AS A RESULT
OF SEEING THE RESULTS, THE
SURVEY, SOME OF THE OTHER
THINGS THAT WE LEARNED THAT
PEOPLE WERE LIVING FURTHER AWAY
.
PEOPLE TOLD US THAT THEY MORE
SO THAN IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN THEY
WISH THEY COULD LIVE CLOSER AND
BE ABLE TO TAKE DIFFERENT MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
WAS MORE SOMETHING THAT WAS ON
PEOPLE'S MINDS VERSUS
CONGESTION CONGESTION WHICH IS
WHY THE TRAFFIC CONGESTION
WASN'T AS BIG OF A MOTIVATOR AS
IT HAD BEEN.
SO THOSE ARE THINGS WE'RE
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION AS WE
CONTINUE TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO
USE ALTERNATIVE SUSTAINABLE
FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION.
AND WHAT THAT MIGHT LOOK LIKE
IS WE WE TRIED A NEW CHALLENGE
IN SEPTEMBER OF TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THE WORLD CAR FREE
CHALLENGE HAPPENED STARS HAPPEN
TO ALIGN WHERE GREEN VERY WELL
ON AN INTERNATIONAL WORLD CAR
FREE DAY.
AND SO WE DID A MINI CHALLENGE
THAT INVITED INDIVIDUALS ACROSS
OUR COMMUNITY TO JOIN OUR
CHALLENGE OUR CHALLENGE WINNER
HERE SPENCER WAS TAKING THE D
TO A TWO FROM DETROIT TO ANN
ARBOR.
HE WORKED IN DOWNTOWN ANN
HE HAPPENED TO HEAR ABOUT IT AT
ARBOR.
THE GREEN FAIR.
HE HAPPENED TO HEAR ABOUT IT AT
SO REALLY THAT COLLABORATION
THE GREEN FAIR.
WITH OSSI HELPED US BRING A NEW
SO REALLY THAT COLLABORATION
PERSON NOT NECESSARILY INTO
WITH OSSI HELPED US BRING A NEW
ALTERNATIVE COMMUTING BUT
PERSON NOT NECESSARILY INTO
HELPING TO TELL THE STORY
ALTERNATIVE COMMUTING BUT
OF THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
HELPING TO TELL THE STORY
PEOPLE DO DO.
OF THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
SO THEY'RE ALWAYS HELPFUL
PEOPLE DO DO.
MESSAGES TO SHARE WITH OUR
SO THEY'RE ALWAYS HELPFUL
NEIGHBORS AND THEY CERTAINLY
MESSAGES TO SHARE WITH OUR
THOSE WHO DID PARTICIPATE
NEIGHBORS AND THEY CERTAINLY
CERTAINLY A LOT OF REALLY GREAT
THOSE WHO DID PARTICIPATE
MILESTONES IN TERMS OF WALKING,
CERTAINLY A LOT OF REALLY GREAT
BIKING, CARPOOLING AND USING
MILESTONES IN TERMS OF WALKING,
OUR BUSSES.
BIKING, CARPOOLING AND USING
>> WE WERE ABLE TO RUN CONQUER
OUR BUSSES.
THE COLD AGAIN THIS WINTER.
>> WE WERE ABLE TO RUN CONQUER
WE HAVE WE WERE ABLE TO MEET
THE COLD AGAIN THIS WINTER.
SOME OF OUR HIGHEST POINT TOTAL
WE HAVE WE WERE ABLE TO MEET
GETTERS AND HERE SOME OF THEIR
SOME OF OUR HIGHEST POINT TOTAL
STORIES IF YOU'RE FOLLOWING GET
GETTERS AND HERE SOME OF THEIR
DOWNTOWN ON FACEBOOK AND
STORIES IF YOU'RE FOLLOWING GET
INSTAGRAM WE ARE COMMUNICATING
DOWNTOWN ON FACEBOOK AND
THESE STORIES AND THIS
INSTAGRAM WE ARE COMMUNICATING
INFORMATION ABOUT THE NEIGHBORS
THESE STORIES AND THIS
IN OUR COMMUNITY WHO ARE
INFORMATION ABOUT THE NEIGHBORS
CHOOSING TO WALK AND IN THIS
IN OUR COMMUNITY WHO ARE
CASE AND WHY BUT WE ARE ALSO
CHOOSING TO WALK AND IN THIS
REPORTING OUT THOSE FACTS ABOUT
CASE AND WHY BUT WE ARE ALSO
THE ESTIMATIONS ABOUT
REPORTING OUT THOSE FACTS ABOUT
GREENHOUSE GAS SAVED AND THAT
THE ESTIMATIONS ABOUT
SORT OF THING SENSITIVE
GREENHOUSE GAS SAVED AND THAT
IMPORTANT TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE
SORT OF THING SENSITIVE
LIVED TO SEE WHAT THE
IMPORTANT TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE
QUANTIFICATION OF THEIR EFFORTS
LIVED TO SEE WHAT THE
ARE AND THEN LOOKING BACK TO
QUANTIFICATION OF THEIR EFFORTS
ALMOST A FULL YEAR AGO ON THE
ARE AND THEN LOOKING BACK TO
COMMUTER CHALLENGE, THE
ALMOST A FULL YEAR AGO ON THE
COMMUTER CHALLENGE JUST RUN IN
COMMUTER CHALLENGE, THE
MAY.
COMMUTER CHALLENGE JUST RUN IN
SO IT'S UPCOMING SIGN UP IS
MAY.
OPEN NOW BUT JUST A SHOUT OUT
SO IT'S UPCOMING SIGN UP IS
SOME OF OUR WINNERS FROM LAST
OPEN NOW BUT JUST A SHOUT OUT
YEAR WE HAD FOUR DIFFERENT
SOME OF OUR WINNERS FROM LAST
SIDES CATEGORIES WHERE WE WERE
YEAR WE HAD FOUR DIFFERENT
INVITING WORKPLACE IS TO WORK
SIDES CATEGORIES WHERE WE WERE
TOGETHER TO GET AS MANY
INVITING WORKPLACE IS TO WORK
OF THEIR COLLEAGUES INVOLVED IN
TOGETHER TO GET AS MANY
USING ALTERNATIVES TO DRIVING
OF THEIR COLLEAGUES INVOLVED IN
ALONE.
USING ALTERNATIVES TO DRIVING
WE GOT A SHOUT OUT ON SOCIAL
ALONE.
MEDIA FOR ONE OF THE WINNING
WE GOT A SHOUT OUT ON SOCIAL
TEAMS OF JUST KIND
MEDIA FOR ONE OF THE WINNING
OF HIGHLIGHTING WHY THIS
TEAMS OF JUST KIND
PROGRAM MATTERS TO THEM EVEN
OF HIGHLIGHTING WHY THIS
THOUGH THEY'RE ALREADY
PROGRAM MATTERS TO THEM EVEN
PROVIDING BICYCLE BENEFITS.
THOUGH THEY'RE ALREADY
WE LOVE SEEING EXEMPLARS LIKE
PROVIDING BICYCLE BENEFITS.
THIS AND HELPING AGAIN OUR
WE LOVE SEEING EXEMPLARS LIKE
COMMUNITY MEMBERS UNDERSTAND
THIS AND HELPING AGAIN OUR
SOMETHING THAT IS ACHIEVABLE
COMMUNITY MEMBERS UNDERSTAND
AND THAT THAT OTHERS ARE DOING
SOMETHING THAT IS ACHIEVABLE
AND IT'S PERFECTLY ACCEPTABLE
AND THAT THAT OTHERS ARE DOING
TO TAKE WHAT THEY'RE DOING AND
AND IT'S PERFECTLY ACCEPTABLE
IMPLEMENTED IT AT THEIR OWN
TO TAKE WHAT THEY'RE DOING AND
WORKPLACE.
IMPLEMENTED IT AT THEIR OWN
>> SO MOVING ON FROM THE THREE
WORKPLACE.
CHALLENGES THE GO PASS PROGRAM
>> SO MOVING ON FROM THE THREE
HAD ANOTHER IMPACTFUL YEAR.
CHALLENGES THE GO PASS PROGRAM
WE WERE ACTUALLY ABLE TO CRUNCH
HAD ANOTHER IMPACTFUL YEAR.
THE NUMBERS OF THE LAST GO PAST
WE WERE ACTUALLY ABLE TO CRUNCH
SEASON AND TAKE INTO
THE NUMBERS OF THE LAST GO PAST
CONSIDERATION WHAT PARKING
SEASON AND TAKE INTO
RATES WERE, HOW MANY TRIPS
CONSIDERATION WHAT PARKING
PEOPLE TOOK AND JUST PARKING
RATES WERE, HOW MANY TRIPS
AND GAS.
PEOPLE TOOK AND JUST PARKING
A CONSERVATIVE ESTIMATE IS ONE
AND GAS.
POINT ALMOST FIVE MILLION IN
A CONSERVATIVE ESTIMATE IS ONE
ANNUAL SAVINGS FOR THOSE
POINT ALMOST FIVE MILLION IN
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEES WHO
ANNUAL SAVINGS FOR THOSE
PARTICIPATED IN THE PROGRAM.
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEES WHO
I THINK THE NUMBER USED FOR FOR
PARTICIPATED IN THE PROGRAM.
GAS WAS LIKE THREE DOLLARS
I THINK THE NUMBER USED FOR FOR
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT IT WAS IN
GAS WAS LIKE THREE DOLLARS
DECEMBER AT THE TIME WE DID THE
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT IT WAS IN
CALCULATION WHICH IS CERTAINLY
DECEMBER AT THE TIME WE DID THE
REALLY LOW.
CALCULATION WHICH IS CERTAINLY
SO THIS NUMBER IS PROBABLY A
REALLY LOW.
LOT HIGHER AND THEN OF COURSE
SO THIS NUMBER IS PROBABLY A
THERE'S IMPACTS ON FUEL SAVED
LOT HIGHER AND THEN OF COURSE
AND GREENHOUSE GASES SWITCHING
THERE'S IMPACTS ON FUEL SAVED
THOSE TRIPS TO A SHARED FORM
AND GREENHOUSE GASES SWITCHING
OF TRANSPORTATION THAT'S ENERGY
THOSE TRIPS TO A SHARED FORM
EFFICIENT LIKE THE BUS SO WITH
OF TRANSPORTATION THAT'S ENERGY
THE GO PASS PROGRAM IT'S NOT
EFFICIENT LIKE THE BUS SO WITH
POSSIBLE WITHOUT STRONG PARTNER
THE GO PASS PROGRAM IT'S NOT
LIKE THE ANN ARBOR DOWNTOWN
POSSIBLE WITHOUT STRONG PARTNER
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BACKING
LIKE THE ANN ARBOR DOWNTOWN
IT.
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BACKING
BUT IT IS A SUCCESSFUL PROGRAM
IT.
THAT HAS BEEN GOING ON FOR IT
BUT IT IS A SUCCESSFUL PROGRAM
STARTED IN NINETEEN NINETY NINE
THAT HAS BEEN GOING ON FOR IT
.
STARTED IN NINETEEN NINETY NINE
WE'LL BE WORKING ON CELEBRATING
.
TWENTY FIVE YEARS OF KIND OF A
WE'LL BE WORKING ON CELEBRATING
SUCCESSFUL PROGRAM THAT
TWENTY FIVE YEARS OF KIND OF A
ENCOURAGED PEOPLE TO CONSIDER
SUCCESSFUL PROGRAM THAT
AN ALTERNATIVE BESIDES PARKING
ENCOURAGED PEOPLE TO CONSIDER
AND CONTINUES TO THIS DAY.
AN ALTERNATIVE BESIDES PARKING
SO I THINK I GOT THROUGH
AND CONTINUES TO THIS DAY.
EVERYTHING PRETTY QUICKLY AND
SO I THINK I GOT THROUGH
WANT TO OFFER YOU THE
EVERYTHING PRETTY QUICKLY AND
OPPORTUNITY TO ASK ANY
WANT TO OFFER YOU THE
QUESTIONS TO ME.
OPPORTUNITY TO ASK ANY
BUT OF COURSE I ALSO HAVE AN
QUESTIONS TO ME.
ASK OF YOU WHICH IS WE LOVE
BUT OF COURSE I ALSO HAVE AN
SEEING OUR COMMUNITY LEADERS
ASK OF YOU WHICH IS WE LOVE
WHO ARECTIVE AS DEMONSTRATED
SEEING OUR COMMUNITY LEADERS
BY YOUR RULES HERE SIGN UP FOR
WHO ARECTIVE AS DEMONSTRATED
THE COMMUTER CHALLENGE AND WE'D
BY YOUR RULES HERE SIGN UP FOR
LOVE TO SEE YOU ON THE
THE COMMUTER CHALLENGE AND WE'D
LEADERBOARD.
LOVE TO SEE YOU ON THE
HOPEFULLY EVEN IF YOU ALREADY
LEADERBOARD.
TAKE ALTERNATIVE FORMS
HOPEFULLY EVEN IF YOU ALREADY
OF TRANSPORTATION IT'S NICE FOR
TAKE ALTERNATIVE FORMS
OTHER PEOPLE TO TO DISCOVER
OF TRANSPORTATION IT'S NICE FOR
THAT THEY'RE NOT ALONE
.
ANY QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS DENHA
THIS IS REALLY EXCITING AND
GREAT WILL HOW WILL THIS BE
DISSEMINATED OUT TO THROUGH
EMPLOYER TO THE COMMUNITY?
IS THERE LIKE A MEDIA PLAN OR
WILL WE GET PEOPLE TO DO THIS
AND THIS IS GOING TO BE
MEASURED AT THE END AND THE AND
THAT BEING THE COMMUTER
CHALLENGE.
>> YES, SORRY.
NO PROBLEM.
SO THERE IS A MEDIA PLAN.
IT'S TYPICALLY GOES OUT IN
FOLKS WHO'VE ALREADY BEEN
INVOLVED.
WE RECRUIT THEM TO CONTINUE
INVOLVEMENT.
WE PUSH IT OUT ON SOCIAL IT'S
GOES IN THE RIDES NEWSLETTER.
IT GOES THE MIDDAY NEWSLETTER
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY LIKE
IT GOES OUT PRETTY WIDELY.
ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO PUT A
BLURB IN WE WE CERTAINLY
WELCOME THAT AND ASK IT THOUGH
THERE'S HOPEFULLY IT WILL BE
SEEN BY MANY ERICA, THANKS SO
MUCH FOR THE UPDATE.
ONE THING I WAS WONDERING ABOUT
AND IF YOU'VE UPDATED IT
RECENTLY WITH THE BILL PASS
USAGE, DO YOU KNOW HOW MANY I
REMEMBER A STUDY MANY YEARS AGO
THAT KIND OF TOOK A LOOK AT HOW
MANY PARKING SPACES WEREN'T
GETTING FILLED IN OUR PARKING
STRUCTURES AS A RESULT OF PAST
USAGE.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S IF
YOU'VE BEEN LOOKING AT THE
NUMBERS THAT WAY SINCE AND THE
OBVIOUSLY THE D.A. IS FINDING
IT PARTIALLY BECAUSE IT'S THAT
PUSHING DEMAND FOR MORE PARKING
DOWNTOWN.
UM, I MAY HAVE CALCULATED THAT
IT IS KIND OF A WONKY NUMBER TO
LOOK AT.
I THINK OUR OUR
ONE OF OUR LIKE
THE THE WEBSITE WE USE FOR THE
COMMUTER CHALLENGE DOES DO SOME
CALCULATIONS LIKE THAT FOR US
BUT IT IS KIND OF OBSCURE
SOMETIMES HOW THOSE NUMBERS
COME APART SO I DON'T HAVE THAT
NUMBER HANDY WITH ME RIGHT NOW.
>> YEAH, NO THAT'S OK AND I'M
NOT THINKING ABOUT IT SO MUCH
THE COMMUTER CHALLENGE MORE THE
GO PASS USAGE BUT MIGHT BE
INTERESTING TO YOU BUT THANKS.
I WANT TO YEAH.
THANKS FOR A GREAT PRESENTATION
CYNTHIA.
HOW CAN THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION HELP I MEAN
OBVIOUSLY SPREADING THE WORD
OUT TO OUR RESPECTIVE JOBS
EMPLOYERS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
>> HOW ELSE DO YOU THINK WE
COULD HELP?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT IS BEING
AWARE OF THIS CHALLENGE REALLY
DOES HELP IN A LOT OF WAYS
KNOWING THAT IT IS OUR NEIGHBOR
AND NOT NECESSARILY SOMETIMES
WE HAVE IDEAS IN OUR HEAD
OF WHO ARE IS SOMEONE WHO COULD
COMMUTE BY BIKE OR IT'S SOMEONE
WHO HAS A BETTER SITUATION
WHOSE LIFE IS MAYBE DIFFERENT
FROM OURS.
BUT WHEN WE DO THESE CHALLENGES
WE FIND THAT THEY ARE PEOPLE
WITH RESPONSIBILITY THEN WHO
ALSO HAVE ERRANDS TO PICK ON
THE WAY HOME AND SO IT DOES
HELP TO OUTSIDE OF THE
CHALLENGE, WITHIN THE CHALLENGE
CONTINUE TO, YOU KNOW, TELL
YOUR STORY OF HOW YOU'RE USING
YOUR EVEN JUST ONCE A MONTH
THAT THE STARS ALIGN FOR YOUR
SCHEDULE TO BIKE INSTEAD
OF WHAT YOU TYPICALLY DO OR USE
A BUS JUST MAKING THAT THAT
EFFORT AND MAKING IT PUBLIC
THAT YOU WENT THROUGH AND AND
TAGUS WE'RE AT GET DOWNTOWN ON
SOCIAL MEDIA IF YOU'RE TAGGING
US, WE'RE HAPPY TO ELEVATE
THOSE MESSAGES WHERE
APPROPRIATE OF OUR COMMUNITY
TAKING ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
>> GOTCHA.
OH YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK MAKING IT ANECDOTAL AND
MAKING IT KIND OF LIKE
RELATABLE.
HUGE.
SO GREAT.
THANK YOU AGAIN SO MUCH FOR AN
AWESOME PRESENTATION.
THE OTHER QUESTION QUESTIONS
COMMENTS I JUST HAD ONE MORE
I'M SO SORRY BUT WAS JUST GOING
TO I WAS JUST JUST THINKING YOU
KNOW WE'RE LESS THAN A MONTH
AWAY FROM THE CHALLENGE AND
EARTH DAY IS COMING UP AND IT
MAY BE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
PROMOTE THIS THE SUSTAINABILITY
PIECE OF THAT WHEN BRINGING A
DIFFERENT AUDIENCE THAT MAY NOT
BE FOLLOWING THE MENTIONED
PIECES IS WHEN I THINK ABOUT IT
ENCOURAGING PEOPLE TO THINK
OF ALTERNATIVE WAYS
OF TRANSPORTATION.
THEY MAY NOT UNDERSTAND THE
BENEFITS AND THE LIGHT THAT YOU
JUST PRESENTED.
SO MAYBE THE SUSTAINABILITY
SIDE, MAYBE A WAY TO GET THAT
GET INTERESTING FOR PEOPLE TO
RIDE OR TAKE CHARGE
.
THANKS.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL THANKS AS ALWAYS.
IT'S GOOD TO HEAR FROM YOU.
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
THANKS FOR COMING BY AND
UPDATING US ON THE GET DOWNTOWN
PROGRAM.
>> THANKS EVERYONE.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS THE CRASH RESPONSE
PROTOCOL.
THE COMMISSION REQUESTED A
PRESENTATION ON THE CITY'S
RESPONSE TO SERIOUS CRASHES.
SO LIEUTENANT SCHERBA WILL TALK
THROUGH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT'S
PROCEDURES AND REYMUNDO I'M
SURE WILL CHIME IN ON WHAT THE
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT DOES UP
JUST AFTER A SERIOUS CRASH AS
WELL.
SO I'LL THINK IS IS IT THE TIME
SCHERBA OH, THANKS.
APPRECIATE IT AND APPRECIATE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK WITH
EVERYONE THIS EVENING REGARDING
OUR CRASH RESPONSE AND I'LL
GIVE A LITTLE BIT OF AN
OVERVIEW THE BASIC RESPONSE AND
THEN DETAIL MORE SERIOUS AND
ADVANCED CRASH RECONSTRUCTION,
THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO TYPICALLY OUR OUR OFFICERS
WILL RESPOND TO A CRASH SCENE
AFTER RECEIVING A CALL FROM
EITHER WITNESS SOMEONE INVOLVED
IN THE CRASH, A BYSTANDER, ETC.
SO WE'LL GET DISPATCHED OR OUR
OFFICERS WHO ARE ALREADY
WORKING THE ROAD HEAD TO A
CRASH LOCATION AND WE'LL DO AN
ASSESSMENT.
THE OFFICER WILL HAVE SOME IDEA
GENERALLY ON THE WAY THERE WHAT
THE CRASH INVOLVES AS FAR AS
THE SERIOUSNESS BECAUSE
TYPICALLY THE AUTHORITY WILL
HAVE SOME INDICATION SERIOUS AS
AN INJECTION IN THE CAR ROLLED
OVER THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO TYPICALLY HAVE SOME
INDICATION OF THE SERIOUSNESS
OF THE CRASH.
BUT AGAIN, THE REAL PATROL
OFFICERS WHO ARE ALREADY ON
DUTY AND ALREADY WORKING ARE
THE ONES WHO ARE FIRST ON SCENE
AND IT'S A BASIC CRASH OR MINOR
CRASH WITH MINOR OR NO INJURY.
THE PATROL OFFICER WHO'S THERE
WILL CONDUCT INVESTIGATION ON
SCENE THOUGH THEY WILL THEN
DOCUMENT THE THEIR FINDINGS
WITH THE STATE CRASH BURN WHICH
IS CALLED THE DUTY TEN AND
THOSE GET FILED WITH THE STATE
AND THEN RETAINED ON RECORD FOR
CRASHES THAT ARE MORE SERIOUS
AND WE DEFINE THAT BY LIKE A
DEBILITATING OR LIFE CHANGING
TYPE INJURY FATALITY SOMETHING
THAT'S GOING TO LIKELY CHANGE
THE COURSE OF SOMEONE'S LIFE AS
FAR AS THEIR INJURY OF A
SERIOUS NATURE.
THE OFFICER ON SCENE WILL
REALIZE THAT THERE'S SOMETHING
MORE SERIOUS HERE THAN JUST A
BASIC CRASH, A FENDER WE'VE
GOT TO GET MAKE SURE WE DO THIS
THE INVESTIGATION ACCURATELY
POTENTIALLY CALLING AN
INVESTIGATOR TO HELP WITH SEEM
SO IN THAT CASE THE SUPERVISOR
WILL RESPOND AND THEN THE
SUPERVISOR AGAIN WAS ALREADY
WORKING.
THE ROAD WILL MAKE THE
DETERMINATION DO WE NEED
ADVANCED CRASH RECONSTRUCTION
HERE IF THE ANSWER IS YES AND
TYPICALLY AGAIN IF YOU HAVE A
SIGNIFICANT INJURY OR SOMEONE
GETS TRANSPORTED SOMEONE OR
POTENTIALLY DIES IN THE CRASH
ALL RIGHT ON THE ROAD THINGS
LIKE THAT WE IT'S A MAJOR
CRASH.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THE CRASH
INVESTIGATION RESPOND TO THE
SUPERVISOR ON SCENE.
WE'LL GET A HOLD OF OUR
DEPARTMENT PRESS CRASH
INVESTIGATION SUPERVISOR WHICH
IS PETTILY HE HAS HE FIELDS
HEADS THE TEAM OF CRASH
INVESTIGATORS.
WE HAVE BOTH INVESTIGATORS WHO
HAVE ADVANCED TRAINING THEN WE
HAVE RECONSTRUCTION TRAIN
OFFICERS WHICH IS EVEN MORE
ADVANCED THAN A MINIVAN LIKE
THE ADVANCED AND THEN THE SUPER
ADVANCED WHICH IS CALLED A
DECONSTRUCTIONIST AND THEN
DETERMINING ON AGAIN THE
SEVERITY WILL CALL OUT OUR
INVESTIGATORS, OUR CRASH TEAM
TO COME AND HAVE A LOOK AT THE
INVESTIGATION AND SOMETIMES
THEY'LL BE ON SCENE WITHIN AN
HOUR OR LESS BECAUSE SOMEONE IS
WORKING WHO HAS THE CRASH
TRAINING AND AT TIMES IT'S THEY
GET THEY GET CALLED IN THE
MILLIMETER CALLED FROM HOME
THEY HAVE TO RESPOND TO IT'S A
LONGER RESPONSE AND THOSE
INSTANCES OUR PATROL OFFICERS
WILL HOLD THE SCENE DOWN TO
ALLOW THE CRASH INVESTIGATORS
TO ARRIVE AND DOCUMENT THE
LOCATION OF EVERYTHING THEY'VE
GOT SPECIAL EQUIPMENT THAT WITH
LASER DEVICES THAT CAN MEASURE
DIFFERENT THINGS LIKE SKID
MARKS AND MARKS AND DAMAGE AND
DEBRIS IN THE ROAD AND ALL THE
THINGS LIKE THAT IF WARRANTED
THEIR INVESTIGATION COULD ALSO
INCLUDE THE REMOVAL OF WHAT'S
CALLED THE D.R WHICH IS EVENT
DATA RECORDER WHICH SOME PEOPLE
CALL THE BLACK BOX LIKE YOU
THINK ABOUT A PLANE WITH A CAR,
A CAR TWENTY FOURTEEN ISH AND
NEWER HAVE THESE BOXES THAT ARE
ACCESSIBLE BY COMPUTER
EQUIPMENT SO THEY CAN SAY OK,
WHAT WAS THE SPEED WHEN THE
IMPACT HAPPENED WAS AN AIRBAG
DEPLOYED?
WAS BRAKING INVOLVED IN ALL
THESE THINGS THAT FACTORS AND
THEY DETERMINE WHAT HAPPENED
KIND OF IN THE CRASH AND THEN
ARE ABLE TO DETERMINE A FAULT
OF A PERSON OR IF THERE IS ANY
OTHER MITIGATING FACTORS.
THOSE ARE ALL ALSO INCLUDED.
SO ONCE THAT IS COMPLETE AND
THAT CAN TAKE A LONG TIME, WE
CAN TELL THE VEHICLES AWAY WE
CAN STORE THEM AT ONE OF THE
LOCAL TOTAL YARDS AND THEN THE
INVESTIGATION SOMETIMES IS
LENGTHY WITH INTERVIEWS WITH
INJURED PEOPLE THAT MAYBE
AREN'T ABLE TO PROVIDE A
STATEMENT RIGHT AWAY THAT CAN
TAKE A TAKE QUITE A WHILE TO TO
GET SOME OF THESE
INVESTIGATIONS DONE.
AND IN THE MEANTIME, ONCE THE
THE PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION
OR THE OR THE SCENE IS WE'LL
SEE CLEAR AND WE KNOW IT'S A
SIGNIFICANT ACCIDENT.
WHAT OUR PATROL OFFICERS DO IS
THEY'LL LET ME KNOW AND THEN I
WILL LET RAYMOND KNOW.
HEY, WE'VE GOT A SERIOUS
SERIOUS CRASH HERE.
THIS IS HERE'S THE DOCUMENTED
DOCUMENTATION INFORMATION I
HAVE SO FAR AND I'LL PROVIDE
HIM EVERYTHING THAT I CAN THAT
I'M ABLE TO RELEASE TO HIM THAT
DAY OR THE DAY AFTER.
AND THEN RAYMOND'S TEAM CAN HE
CAN TAKE AND DISCUSS WHAT KIND
OF HAPPENS FROM THERE BUT THE
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT WILL
TAKE A LOOK AT THE AREA AT THE
INTERSECTION.
THEY'LL LOOK THINGS LIKE STREET
LIGHTS AND TRAFFIC LIGHTS,
TREES AND FIELD US LINE
OF SIGHT.
THINGS LIKE THAT DETERMINE IS
THERE ANYTHING ELSE IN HERE
THAT WE NEED TO LOOK AT FROM AN
ENGINEERING STANDPOINT THAT
MAYBE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO
THIS TO THE SITUATION?
>> SO IF I IF WE WANT TO ADD
ANYTHING TO THAT RAYMOND.
>> YEAH, THANK YOU, LIEUTENANT.
YOU'RE RIGHT.
I THINK YOU REALLY HIT THE NAIL
ON THE HEAD.
THE FIRST THING THAT WE TRY TO
DO IS REALLY SCAN THE EXISTING
INFRASTRUCTURE TO SEE IF ANY
OF IT IS FAILING.
SO IF THERE IS A FLASHING
YELLOW PEDESTRIAN SIGN LIKE A
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACON, WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT IT'S WORKING WHEN ACTUATED
ON BOTH SIDES, MAKING SURE THAT
THE LIGHTS ARE SIGNALING WHAT
HAVE YOU.
WE ALSO IF THE CRASH OCCURRED
AT NIGHT WE WANT TO GO AND MAKE
SURE THAT THE STREETLIGHTS ARE
OPERATING PROPERLY.
WE ALSO TAKE A LOOK AT LIKE
PAVEMENT MARKINGS, THINGS LIKE
THAT TO MAKE SURE ALL OF THAT
IS IN GOOD CONDITION.
AND SO THAT'S KIND OF OUR
INITIAL SCAN AND THEN WE WILL
OFTEN KIND
OF THINK THROUGH IT
IF WE KIND OF GET ENOUGH
DETAILS ON THE CONTRIBUTING
FACTORS TO THE CRASH, WE MAY
ALSO START TO THINK THROUGH
OTHER MORE HOLISTIC CHANGES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
TENDED TO ROCKHAMPTON OR MIGHT
BE ABLE TO TO BACK ME UP ON IS
A LOT OF TIMES THERE'S A SORT
OF BEHAVIORAL COMPONENT AND WE
TRY TO THINK THROUGH HOW MUCH
OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE MAY HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO THAT BEHAVIORAL
MISJUDGMENT FOR LACK OF A
BETTER TERM VERSUS JUST BEING
AN INATTENTIVE DRIVER OR
WHATEVER THE CASE MAY BE.
AND SO WE TRY TO TAKE ALL THAT
INTO CONSIDERATION, ESPECIALLY
WITH THE FATALITIES AND THE
SERIOUS CRASHES AND THEN IF
THERE'S SOMETHING THAT NEEDS
REPAIR, WE PROGRAM THAT
IMMEDIATELY BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY
THE INFRASTRUCTURE IS FAILING.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE WE
DO THAT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AND
THEN IF THERE'S A BIGGER
CAPITAL PROJECTS OR A LONGER
TERM INVESTMENT OR SOME SORT
OF CHANGE THAT WE MIGHT
CONSIDER, WE START THINKING
THROUGH SOME OF THE PROCESSES
AND PROGRAMS THAT WE CAN
LEVERAGE TO TO ACTUATE THOSE
CHANGES.
SOME ARE EASIER SAID THAN DONE.
OBVIOUSLY SOME FIXES CAN BE
DONE WITHIN EXISTING BUDGETS
BUT SOME FIXES MIGHT BE BIG AND
NEED TO BE PROGRAMS THROUGH THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM AND
OR THROUGH THE CITY'S BUDGETING
PROCESS.
SO IT'S REALLY JUST A FUNCTION
OF REALLY UNDERSTANDING KIND
OF WHAT CONTRIBUTED TO IT AND
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT THOSE
COUNTERMEASURES YOU'VE HEARD US
TALK BEFORE THIS IS ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY WE PRODUCED THE
CRASH REPORT BECAUSE WE REALLY
WANT SORT OF THE TRENDS TO BE
UNDERSTOOD.
MY OBSERVATION IS A LOT OF OUR
SERIOUS CRASHES ARE FAIRLY
RANDOMLY DISTRIBUTED AROUND THE
CITY.
>> WE DON'T REALLY HAVE A
SINGLE LOCATION AT A SINGLE
INTERSECTION WHERE WE HAVE A
LOT OF SERIOUS CRASHES THAT
HAPPEN AND SO SOMETIMES MAKES
IT DIFFICULT TO REALLY UNPACK A
LOT OF WHAT WENT INTO THE CAUSE
OF THAT CRASH AND REALLY
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THOSE
COUNTERMEASURES CAN BE.
BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
WORKING THROUGH WHICH IS WHY WE
HAVE THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM AND OTHER THINGS THAT
WE'RE WORKING THROUGH TO TO
BRING THOSE SPEEDS DOWN AND
HOPEFULLY LESSEN THE SEVERITY
OF THOSE CRASHES WHEN THEY'RE
GOING TO I THE PIGGYBACK A
LITTLE BIT ON, RAYMENT SAID AS
THE AND THIS ALSO TOUCHES ON
YOUR WEBSITE AND CRASHES IN
ARBITRAGED WHICH I THINK YOU'VE
GOT A REAL NICE JOB THERE
DOCUMENTING A LOT OF THINGS AND
YOU MENTIONED THE HUMAN ERROR
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
THAT'S TOUGH TO TO MEASURE
SOMETIMES.
BUT WE I THINK HAVE TO HAVE TO
REALIZE THAT THAT'S ALWAYS
GOING TO BE THERE AND WE CAN DO
EVERYTHING WE CAN TO TRY TO
MITIGATE THAT.
BUT WITH DISTRACTED DRIVING AND
OTHER THINGS LIKE THAT, THE
HUMAN ERROR IS GOING TO BE
THERE AND WE JUST I GUESS HAVE
TO TRY TO DO WE CAN ON OUR PART
WITH WITH THE ENFORCEMENT SIDE
AND THE INVESTIGATION SIDE AND
AND WITH THE THE THINGS THAT
RAYMOND HIS TEAM DO AFTERWARDS
TO TRY TO MITIGATE THAT.
BUT ULTIMATELY THERE'S THAT
HUMAN FACTOR THAT I THINK YOU
JUST NEED TO KIND OF PUT IN THE
BACK OF YOUR MIND THAT THAT'S
THAT'S SOMETIMES IS A MATTER
WHAT WE DO HOW PERFECT WE CAN
MAKE THE STREETS SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
THERE'S STILL A POSSIBILITY
THAT ACTIONS ARE GOING TO
HAPPEN.
>> IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE THAT
RAYMOND OR YOUR BOOK YOU WANT
TO GO OVER BEFORE WE GET INTO
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS THAT THAT
WAS ALL I HAD.
>> I'M HAPPY TO ANSWER ANYTHING
GOING FOR LIEUTENANT?
MAYBE YOU JUST WANT TO SPEND A
QUICK MOMENT TALKING ABOUT THE
UDY 10 AND KIND OF JUST THE
STANDARDIZED FORM BECAUSE WHILE
I THINK IT'S VERY INFORMATIVE
AND IT HELPS US QUANTIFY AND
GET DETAILS ON A CRASH, THERE
ARE ALSO IT'S A STANDARDIZED
FORM AT THE STATE LEVEL.
IT HAS A COUPLE OF SHORTCOMINGS
ESPECIALLY SCOOTERS THAT WE'VE
HEARD YOU REPORT ON THAT.
SO MAYBE IF YOU COULD JUST NOT
OBVIOUSLY GO THROUGH IT FIELD
BY FIELD BUT JUST KIND OF GIVE
AN OVERVIEW ABOUT WHAT THAT IS
AND HOW IT HELPS INFORM BOTH
INVESTIGATIONS AND ALSO AND I
CAN FOLLOW UP WHAT WE DO WITH
THAT INFORMATION AS WELL.
>> BUT AGAIN, THAT'S THE STATE
STATE CRASH BOREMAN EVERY
AGENCY IN THE STATE USES THE
SAME FORM AND OURS HAPPENS TO
BE ELECTRONIC.
MOST ARE ELECTRONIC NOW AND THE
INVESTIGATOR OFFICER WILL HAVE
THE ABILITY TO ENTER DATA BASED
ON LOCATION OF THE CRASH.
THE ROADWAY WITH LIKE HOW MANY
LANES WHAT THE SPEED LIMIT IS
THERE THE LIGHTING CONDITIONS,
THE WEATHER CONDITIONS.
THE ROADWAY WAS ICY WAS WET,
THINGS LIKE THAT.
WHAT THE TRAFFIC WAS LIKE WAS A
HEAVY MEDIUM LIGHT LIGHTING DAY
LIKE DAWN, DUSK, ET CETERA.
SO THERE ARE ALL THESE
DIFFERENT THINGS ARE CAPTURED
AT A TIME OF THE CRASH AND THEN
YOU'VE GOT THE BEST INFORMATION
ON THE DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS
THAT ARE IN THE VEHICLE.
OBVIOUSLY THEIR INSURANCE
COMPANY, THEIR VEHICLE
INFORMATION AND THEN IT
CAPTURES WHAT WAS THERE WHAT'S
THE TERM THEY USE?
IT'S CALLED ACTION.
WHAT WERE THEY DOING RIGHT
BEFORE THE CRASH?
THE TURNING LEFT WITH THE
BRAKING OR THEY STOPPED ALREADY
WERE ACCELERATING AND THEN WHAT
HAPPENED THEN HAD AN IMPACT
WITH WHAT WE CALL A MOTOR
VEHICLE TRANSPORT WHICH IS ANY
CAR THAT'S ON THE ROADWAY.
SO IMPACT MOTOR VEHICLE
TRANSPORT THEN RAN OFF ROADWAY
THEN HIT A POLE THAT COULD A
SEQUENCE OF EVENTS AS THEY CALL
IT.
THERE'S ANY NUMBER OF THINGS
THAT KIND OF DOCUMENT A PLAY BY
PLAY OF WHAT HAPPENED AND THEN
ANY CRASH IT HAS A AN INJURY
WILL REQUIRE A DIAGRAM SO THE
OFFICER WILL ACTUALLY DRAW THE
INTERSECTION OUT AND WE'LL DRAW
THE CARS AND A LITTLE SKETCH
OF EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED.
NOW THE BEST INVESTIGATORS DO A
LOT MORE DETAILED INVESTIGATION
MEASUREMENTS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT THAT I MENTIONED EARLIER.
SO THERE'S THEIR DIAGRAMS AND
DOCUMENTATION IS MUCH MORE IN
DEPTH BUT ALL OF THEM ALL THE
ALL THE DATA GETS CAPTURED
EITHER BASICALLY ON THE BASIC
FORM AND THE MOST SIMPLE CRASH
MORE SERIOUS WILL GET A DIAGRAM
AS WELL AND THEN YOU COULD GET
AN ADVANCE THE DESICCATION ON
TOP OF THAT.
AND I'LL JUST KIND OF RECAP
WHAT I MENTIONED A MONTH OR SO
AGO ON SOME OF THE CAPTURE
REGARDING VEHICLES.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT CONFUSING AND
WE TRIED OUR BEST TO GET OUR
OFFICERS ALL ON THE SAME PAGE.
BUT FOR EXAMPLE, IF MOTOR
VEHICLES INVOLVED THAN OTHERS,
THAT'S THAT'S PRETTY SIMPLE.
SO YOU CHECK THE MOTOR VEHICLE
BUT IF A BICYCLE IS INVOLVED
THAT'S COULD BE A BICYCLE WITH
TWO WHEELS, THREE WHEELS, A
TRICYCLE COULD BE A RAZOR
SCOOTER.
SO A TWO WEEK OLD WITH YOU
STAND ON IT BUT THERE'S NO
MOTOR NOW IF YOU THROW A MOTOR
ON THAT THEN BECOMES THE MOTOR
VEHICLE.
SAME THING WITH A ELECTRIC BIKE
,WITH THE BIKE WITH A MOTOR
BECOMES A MOTOR VEHICLE.
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT IT'S A
LITTLE BIT CONFUSING.
SO AGAIN, WE'RE TRYING TO GET
OUR OFFICERS GET ON THE SAME
PAGE.
WE DO GET ACCURATE
DOCUMENTATION AS TO EXACTLY
WHAT WHAT TRANSPIRED AND GET
THAT DATA ACCURATE.
SO WHEN IT GETS TO REAGAN AND
HIS TEAM THEY CAN LOOK AT IT
AND SAY OK, THIS WE'VE GOT A
ONE VEHICLE HERE, TWO VEHICLES
OR A SINGLE MOTOR VEHICLE WITH
A PEDESTRIAN OR SINGLE MOTOR
VEHICLE WITH A BIKE OR THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO IF THEY MUDDY THE WATER BUT
JUST TRY TO CLARIFY A LITTLE
BIT THAT THERE'S LITTLE NUANCES
IN THERE THAT CAN BE A LITTLE
CONFUSING AND CAN KIND OF MAKE
THE DATA A LITTLE BIT TOUGHER
TO CAPTURE.
IT'S BEEN GOOD ABOUT FINDING
OUR MISTAKES USUALLY WHEN WE
WHEN WE MAKE THEM AS FAR AS
LIKE WHAT WHAT TYPE OF VEHICLE
WAS IT WAS SCOOTER THAT WAS
MOTORIZED THAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN
A MOTOR VEHICLE, NOT A SCOOTER
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO TRYING TO GET THE MESSAGE
OUT AGAIN FOR OFFICERS TO BE
CONSISTENT SO WE GET ACCURATE
DATA.
THANKS.
LET'S OPEN IT UP TO QUESTIONS
THEN OR COMMENTS ANYONE PETE,
THANKS FOR PUTTING THIS
PRESENTATION TOGETHER,
LIEUTENANT SHERMAN, THANKS ALSO
FOR PLUGGING MY BLOG CRASHES
HERBERG I WILL SAY THAT I
STARTED PUTTING THAT BLOG
TOGETHER THOUGH OUT OF A SENSE
THAT WE ARE NOT VERY GOOD AT
SHARING THE INFORMATION WITH
THE COMMUNITY.
>> I THINK THAT'S A PLACE WHERE
WE CAN IMPROVE THAT PEOPLE NEED
TO UNDERSTAND THERE HAVE EASY
ACCESS TO KNOW WHERE SERIOUS
AND FATAL CRASHES HAVE HAPPENED
IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS SO
THAT'S THAT WAS THE MAIN REASON
WHY I WANTED TO TO PUT THE TO
PUT THAT INFORMATION OUT THERE.
I WILL ADD THOUGH THAT I ONLY
AT THIS TIME FOCUS ON SERIOUS
AND FATALITY CRASHES THAT
INVOLVE NON MOTORIZED USERS SO
THAT THAT THAT'S THE FOCUS
OF WHAT I'M MOST INTERESTED IN
IN PART BECAUSE THOSE ARE
DRIVING THE STUBBORN STUBBORN
LEVEL OF SERIOUS CRASHES THAT
WE HAVE IN THE CITY AND EVEN
CONTRIBUTING TO THE YEAR OVER
YEAR INCREASE THAT WE HAVE SEEN
FROM RECENT YEARS.
ANOTHER THING I WANTED TO
COMMENT ON LIEUTENANT SCHERBA
AS YOU MENTIONED HUMAN ERROR
AND I THINK IT'S I AGREE WITH
THAT THAT THE
CERTAIN EXTENT WE
ARE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
PREVENT OPERATORS OF BICYCLES
AND CARS AND EVEN PEDESTRIANS
FROM MAKING MISTAKES AND WHAT
WE WANT IS A TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM THAT DOESN'T RESULT IN A
LIFE CHANGING INJURY OR A OR A
FATALITY WHEN ONE OF THOSE
MISTAKES HAPPENS.
AND TO ME THAT'S WHY THE
CRITICAL COMPONENT THERE IT
NEEDS TO BE THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT AND THE
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS TO
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO DRIVE AT A
REASONABLE SPEED AND DRIVE
SLOWLY AND BE ABLE TO SEE WHAT
IS COMING, WHAT'S COMING AT
THEM.
THEY NEED TO BE ABLE TO SEE
THAT AT INTERSECTIONS, FOR
EXAMPLE.
AND TO THAT POINT I MEAN I I
I'M GLAD TO HEAR RAYMOND ABOUT
YOUR PARTICIPATION IN THE
ENGINEERING TEAM BUT THE WORK
THAT YOU DO IS NOT SHARED.
THERE'S NO VENUE TO GET THAT
OUT INTO THE COMMUNITY SO THAT
UM THEY CAN EVALUATE WHETHER OR
NOT THE THE THE PLACES WHERE
CRASHES HAVE HAPPENED IN THEIR
OWN NEIGHBORHOODS HAVE BEEN
ADDRESSED PROPERLY.
I MEAN I KEEP AN EYE ON THAT
AND ON MY SIDE OF TOWN AND
THROUGH MY UH THROUGH THE BLOG
I TRY TO PAY ATTENTION TO
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS THAT HAVE
HAPPENED ELSEWHERE WHEN THEY DO
HAPPEN.
UM, SO I GUESS I HAVE BEEN
HOPING THAT OUR ANNUAL CRASH
ANALYSIS, OUR CRASH ANALYSIS
THAT WE THAT WE HAD IN NOVEMBER
OF THIS YEAR THAT THAT WOULD BE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO SHARE WITH
THE COMMUNITY THIS IS WHAT
HAPPENED.
THIS IS WHAT WE'RE DOING TO FIX
AND I GUESS I WOULD JUST LIKE
TO ENCOURAGE MORE OF THAT AND
ALSO TO POINT OUT AGAIN THAT
THAT THIS ACCORDING TO OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN SHOULD BE A
PROCESS THAT IS LED BY
ENGINEERING YOU LOOKING AT WHAT
HAS CONTRIBUTED TO CRASHES AND
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO TO FIX
THEM LIKE THAT NEEDS TO BE LED
BY ENGINEERING.
AND I I WHAT I HEARD TONIGHT IS
THAT UM IT IS THAT THE THE
PROCESS IS LED BY LIEUTENANT
SHERBETS TEAM AND SO I GUESS
FIRST OF ALL IS THAT TRUE AND
CAN WE MOVE MORE TO A PROCESS
THAT IS LED BY ENGINEERING?
AND THEN LASTLY, DO YOU HAVE
SOME RECENT CRASHES THAT HAVE
BEEN ANALYZED BY YOUR TEAM THAT
YOU CAN SHARE WITH US SO WE CAN
WALK THROUGH THIS THIS PROCESS
THAT YOU GUYS EXECUTE WHEN WE
DO HAVE A SERIOUS CRASH SO
THANKS FOR LETTING ME MAKE THAT
LONG COMMENT AND ASK ALL THOSE
QUESTIONS.
>> THANKS AGAIN FOR YOUR
PRESENTATION.
THIS CENTURA AND MAYBE I CAN
TAKE FIRST CRACK AT PETE'S
COMMENTS.
SO I DO WANT TO MAKE A LITTLE
BIT OF A DISTINCTION ABOUT KIND
OF IMMEDIATE CRASH RESPONSE
PROTOCOL AND THEN KIND OF HOW
THAT TRANSITIONS INTO KIND
OF PROGRAMING OF A PROJECT SO
YOU KNOW, LIEUTENANT SCHERBA
STARTED OFF BY TALKING ABOUT
KIND OF THE IMMEDIATE CRASH
RESPONSE PROTOCOL AND AND I
THINK THAT FUNCTION AND ROLE
WILL ALWAYS BE WITH THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
RIGHT.
THEY ARE ON ONE ONE DISPATCH.
THEY ARE THE FIRST RESPONDERS.
THEY HAVE THE SIRENS.
THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO SECURE
A SCENE.
DO THE INVESTIGATION IN TERMS
OF THE KIND OF IMMEDIATE CAUSE
AND EFFECT OF THAT CRASH.
SO WHILE IT'S TRUE THAT THAT
PORTION OF THE OF THE PROCESS
IS DEFINITELY LED BY POLICE AND
WILL CONTINUE TO BE LED BY
POLICE AND IT'S APPROPRIATE TO
BE DONE BY POLICE, I THINK
WE'RE MORE AFTER THE FACT RIGHT
.
IT'S GOING OUT THERE AND
ASSESSING THE SITUATION, SEEING
WHAT HAS BEEN DONE SO AND
AGAIN, IT REALLY DEPENDS ON
KIND OF THE SITUATION.
SO I CAN GIVE YOU ONE EXAMPLE
THAT COMES TO MIND.
THERE WAS A FATALITY OF A
CYCLIST ON STADIUM AT WYNWOOD.
I BELIEVE THIS HAPPENED EARLY
OF LAST YEAR AND THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT INFORMED US THAT
THAT CRASH IF I REMEMBER
CORRECTLY IT HAPPENED VERY
EARLY IN THE MORNING.
IT WAS LIKE 4:00 OR 5:00 IN THE
MORNING ON RIGHT BY THE
MCDONALD'S AND I THINK THE
FITNESS PLACE AND SO WE WERE
INFORMED THE MORNING OF THAT IT
OCCURRED I TOOK A TEAM OUT WITH
ME TO GO AND ASSESS THE
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACONS.
NOW INTERESTINGLY ENOUGH, THE
RP'S ARE NOT AT THE
INTERSECTION.
THEY'RE OFFSET THE INTERSECTION
PROBABLY A COUPLE DOZEN FEET OR
ONE HUNDRED FEET TO THE SOUTH.
THE ROCKIES WERE WORKING.
WE LOOKED AT THE STREET
LIGHTING.
EVERYTHING WAS WORKING PROPERLY
AND MY UNDERSTANDING IS KIND
OF THE DETAILS AROUND THAT
CRASH THERE.
THERE WASN'T A LOT OF TRAFFIC
SOMETIMES AND WE HAVE A
MULTIPLE LANE ROAD.
WE'RE OFTEN CONCERNED ABOUT THE
MULTIPOINT CRASH OR THE DUAL
THREAT CRASH ON A LITTLE ROAD.
SO THE IDEA THERE IS THAT ONE
CAR STOPS AND YIELDS WHICH
SOMETIMES BLOCKS THE VIEW
OF THE OTHER APPROACHING LANE
OF TRAVEL AND THAT OTHER LANE
OF TRAVEL DOES NOT STOP TO
PEDESTRIANS OR CYCLISTS THAT
ARE CROSSING.
HOWEVER, THIS CRASH HAPPENED AT
WYNWOOD AND NOT AT THE RV AND
SO AND THE AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC
OUT THERE WE SUSPECTED SO EARLY
IN THE MORNING THAT THERE
PROBABLY WEREN'T MULTIPLE LANES
OF TRAFFIC GOING SIMULTANEOUSLY
THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN HARD TO
VALIDATE THAT CERTAIN BECAUSE
WE DON'T HAVE VIDEO FOOTAGE OR
WE CAN'T CREATE AN EXACT
CONDITION OF WHAT HAPPENED.
SO WE OBVIOUSLY LOOKED AT IT
FOR SOME OF ITS INFRASTRUCTURE
PIECES AND THEN, YOU KNOW, IN
TERMS OF LONGER TERM PROGRAMING
IMPROVEMENTS, YOU KNOW, WE
DIDN'T HAVE ANYTHING
IMMEDIATELY PROGRAMED FOR THAT
LOCATION BASED ON WHAT WE WERE
ABLE TO DETERMINE.
BUT WE KNOW KNOWING WHAT WE
KNOW NOW AND WE'RE COUNCIL'S
PRIORITIES ARE WE LOOK AT
THINGS LIKE THE THE THE ROAD
RESOLUTION FROM COUNCIL TO LOOK
AT ALL MULTI-LINE ROADS AND SEE
IF THEY'RE APPROPRIATE FOR ROAD
DIETS.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, A LOT
OF THESE CRASHES THAT MIGHT
HAPPEN ON THE ROADS WILL BE
ASSESSED FOR POSSIBLE ROAD DIET
AND THEN THAT COULD BE A
SOLUTION SET IN IN THOSE
CIRCUMSTANCES.
SO THAT'S JUST ONE EXAMPLE THAT
POPS IN MY MIND IN TERMS OF THE
INFORMATION AND THE ROLE THAT
POLICE DEPARTMENT PLAYS VERSUS
THE ROLE THAT THE CITY PLAYS
AND THEN LIKE YOU'VE HEARD ME
KIND OF HINT AT OR THERE'S ALSO
THE SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
THAT HOPING TO GET OFF THE
GROUND IN EARNEST BEFORE TO TOO
LONG AS PART OF OUR SAFE
STREETS PROGRAM LOOKING AT SOME
CORRIDORS THAT DO HAVE CRASH
RATES.
WHAT ARE WHAT ARE ON OUR TIER
ONE AND TIER TWO CORRIDORS WHEN
I SAY THAT THOSE ARE CORRIDORS
IN OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED AS AREAS
OF FOCUS FOR SAFETY, THOSE
AREAS OF FOCUS ARE AREAS THAT
WE REALLY WANT TO CONCENTRATE
OUR SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ON
BECAUSE YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT.
I MEAN SPEED IS THE LEADING
INDICATION ABOUT SEVERITY
OF CRASHES.
I THINK BOTH LIEUTENANT SHIRRA
AND HEAD ON A GOOD POINT WHICH
IS VISION ZERO JUST TO
REEMPHASIZE THE POINT YOU'VE
MADE BEFORE DOES NOT SUGGEST
THERE WILL BE NO CRASHES.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, INHERENT
IN VISION ZERO IS AN
IMPLICATION THAT CRASHES WILL
CONTINUE TO HAPPEN.
BUT THE THE REAL ACTION THERE
IS WHAT CAN WE DO TO REDUCE THE
SEVERITY OF THOSE CRASHES?
WHAT CAN WE DO TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY ARE THEY DO NOT
RESULT IN FATALITIES AND DO NOT
RESULT IN SERIOUS
INCAPACITATING INJURIES AND
REALLY SPEED IS AT THE CRUX
OF THAT DISCUSSION AND SO
THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE'RE GOING
TO TRY TO SPEND AS MUCH TIME
ON.
THAT'S WHY WE ARE INCORPORATING
THINGS LIKE SPEED MANAGEMENT
INTO THE MILLER AFROJACK THAT
IS AN ARTERIAL THIS WILL BE ONE
OF THE FIRST QUARTERS WE'VE
EVER PUT SORT OF TRAFFIC
CALMING OR SPEED MANAGEMENT
ELEMENTS INTO AN ARTERIAL.
AND SO THAT'S WHY WE ARE AND
AGAIN MILLER IS A QUARTER THAT
DID EXPERIENCE A PEDESTRIAN
FATALITY SEVERAL YEARS AGO,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE REASONS WHY
WE WANTED TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT CAPITAL PROJECT INCLUDED
THOSE SORT OF TRAFFIC CALMING
AND SPEED MANAGEMENT MEASURES.
SO THAT'S A LONG WINDED WAY
OF SAYING THAT SOME OF THOSE
CHANGES THAT WE CAN MAKE OUR
IMMEDIATE BUT SOME OF OUR YOU
KNOW, TAKE SOME PROGRAMING,
TAKE FUNDING, TAKE WHATEVER THE
CASE MAY BE AND THEY DO FACTOR
INTO A LOT OF OUR PROJECT
PRIORITIZATION.
FOR EXAMPLE, ONE THING YOU'VE
HEARD ME SAY IN THE PAST OR
EVEN CALEB COLEMAN WHEN SHE'S
PRESENTED ON THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM SAFETY IS
ACTUALLY A SCORING CRITERIA FOR
OUR CAPITAL PROGRAM, ESPECIALLY
FOR ANY TRANSPORTATION PROJECT.
>> SO IF THERE IS A QUARTER
THAT HAS EXPERIENCE IT'S ON OUR
TIER ONE OR TIER TWO CORRIDORS
OR IT HAS A SORT OF CRASH
HISTORY.
THE PROJECT IS EXPECTED TO
INCORPORATE SAFETY
COUNTERMEASURES IN THE PROJECT
DESCRIPTION.
SOMETIMES WE DON'T KNOW WHAT
THOSE ARE BECAUSE WE HAVEN'T
GOTTEN INTO DESIGN DEPENDING ON
WHERE THE PROJECT IS BUT WE'LL
OFTEN PUT PLACEHOLDER LANGUAGE
IN THAT CAPITAL PROJECT AS A
SIGNAL TO THE CAPITAL PROJECT
ENGINEERS TO SAY HEY, YOU KNOW
YOU'RE ON A TIER ONE CORRIDOR.
>> YOU NEED TO THINK ABOUT SOME
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS ON THIS
CORRIDOR AND AND SO YEAH, THOSE
ARE JUST A COUPLE OF EXAMPLES
OF SOME THINGS.
I MEAN I COULD GO ON TO STATE
AND HELP PROJECT HAS A WHOLE
BUNCH OF SAFETY FEATURES, NEW
CROSSWALKS ARE INSTALLED ON
BELTS WERE INSTALLED, LANES
WERE NARROWED SO WELL YOU MAYBE
YOU HAVEN'T HEARD SPECIFIC YOU
KNOW A TO BE SORT
OF CONVERSATION WE WE GET A LOT
OF UPDATES, YOU KNOW, A LOT
OF THE COMPONENTS OF PROJECTS
THAT WE'RE DOING AND A LOT
OF THOSE ARE INFORMED
BY THESE
SORT OF SAFETY METRICS THAT
WE'RE TRYING TO ACHIEVE ERICA,
THANK YOU.
GREAT PRESENTATION AND FOLLOW
UP ANSWERS AND I THINK IT'S
DEFINITELY REALLY CLEAR THAT
OUR OUR TRANSPORTATION WORK IS
FOCUSED IS FRAMED FROM A VISION
ZERO PERSPECTIVE RIGHT NOW THAT
WE'RE DOING A LOT YOU KNOW, A
LOT OF GREAT WORK ON THE
ENGINEERING SIDE OF THIS.
I WANTED TO REVISIT A COUPLE
OF THINGS.
ONE KIND OF POINT THAT THE KEY
WAS BRINGING UP AND THEN ONE
COMPLETELY UNRELATED AS WELL.
SO ONE FOLLOW UP QUESTION IS
JUST AROUND TOXICOLOGY DO WE
HAVE ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I'VE READ IS THAT SOMETIMES
JUST KIND OF GETTING THOSE
GETTING SOME OF THE FEEDBACK
FROM THE TOXICOLOGY CAN BE
CHALLENGING SOMETIMES.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S TRUE FOR
OUR COMMUNITY OR IF WE FEEL
LIKE THAT'S IS THAT EVER AN
ISSUE WITH RELATED TO IT IN THE
CONTEXT OF THE DISCUSSION
TONIGHT FROM APD PERSPECTIVE,
ARE YOU REFERRING TO CRASHES?
YEAH.
OR OR YEAH.
I MEAN YEAH.
WHETHER IT'S ALCOHOL OR
SUBSTANCE ABUSE >> ANY TIME
ALCOHOL OR OR DRUGS OR ANY
IMPAIRMENT IS IS SUSPECTED BUT
THE OFFICER WILL FIRST ASK FOR
CONSENT.
THERE'S AN IMPLIED CONSENT LAW
WITHIN THE STATE SO WHEN ONE
ONE OBTAINS A DRIVER'S LICENSE
THEY ALSO CONSENT TO PROVIDING
A SAMPLE OF BLOOD BREATH OR
URINE UPON REQUEST FROM A PEACE
OFFICER.
SO WHEN WHEN THAT CRASH OCCURS
AND THE IMPAIRMENT IS IS
SUSPECTED, THE OFFICER WILL
GENERALLY ASK FOR FOR A BREATH
THAT WE HAVE A DID YOU CALL DID
IT MATTER NOW IT'S CALLED THE
INTELLECTUALIZE NINE THOUSAND
SOUNDS LIKE SOMETHING THAT BACK
TO THE FUTURE I DON'T KNOW BUT
THE SMALL SMALL DEVICE TO
MEASURE BREATH ALCOHOL CONTENT
WE'VE HAD THE STATION AND LAST
YEAR THROUGH THE MICHIGAN STATE
POLICE THEY FITTED ALL PARTIES
WITH THE SAME BREATH ANALYZER
WHICH IS GOOD FOR CONSISTENCY.
SO WE'LL ASK FOR THAT CONSENT
NOW IF THERE'S A REFUSAL
TYPICALLY THERE WILL BE A
WARRANT OR BLOOD.
SO A BREATH OF BREATH REFUSAL
WILL RESULT AND AGAIN A BLOOD
DRAW AT THE HOSPITAL VIA A
SEARCH WARRANT.
AND TO YOUR POINT, ERIKA, THAT
CAN TAKE SOMETIMES THE RESULTS
30, 60, 90 DAYS TO GET BACK.
SO WE MAY SUSPECT THERE WAS
ALCOHOL INVOLVED AND NOT KNOW
ANYTHING UNTIL TWO, THREE
MONTHS LATER WHEN THE RESULTS
COME BACK.
THAT'S WHEN THE OFFICER WOULD
WRITE A SUPPLEMENTAL OR AND SAY
OK, THIS HAPPENED THIS DAY I
SUSPECTED THE BLOOD I WAS DONE.
IT WAS TAKING THIS DAY ON THIS
DATE THE RESULTS CAME BACK FOR
THIS REASON WE WE HAVE A
PERCEIVED VIOLATION ABOVE POINT
ZERO EIGHT IN REQUESTING CHARGE
CHARGES THROUGH THE PROSECUTOR
AND IT WAS KIND OF THAT LATTER
POINT THAT I WAS WONDERING
ABOUT IN TERMS OF THE LENGTH
OF TIME OF GETTING BACK LAB
RESULTS.
IT SOUNDS LIKE SOMETIMES THAT
CAN BE ON THE LENGTHY SIDE BUT
IT ABSOLUTELY CAN ON THE THE TO
THE INTELLECTUALIZED THAT WE
HAVE HERE THE STATION COMES
BACK ALMOST IMMEDIATELY WITHIN
LIKE THIRTY SECONDS OR SO WE'LL
HAVE AN RESULT AND THEN BASED
ON THAT WE CAN DO A LICENSE
CONFISCATION SIC CHARGES RIGHT
AWAY.
BUT AGAIN WHEN THOSE WE VIEW
THE REFUSAL OR FOR SOME REASON
MAYBE IT IS A CRASH AND THE
PERSON CAN'T CONSENT BECAUSE
THEY'RE UNABLE TO WE MAY DO
BLOOD AT THE HOSPITAL WITH A
WARRANT THAT WAY TOO AND THEN
GET THAT GET THE SAMPLE AND
THEN SEND IT OFF TO THE LAB AND
JUST LAB DENHA AS IT IS THEY
GET SO MUCH INTAKE THAT IT CAN
TAKE A BIT TO GET GET THOSE
RESULTS BACK.
AND THEN THE SECOND PIECE THAT
THAT GETS FOR A LITTLE BIT AND
GET SOME FEEDBACK AROUND IS TO
PETE'S POINT AROUND SORT
OF TRANSPARENCY AROUND OUR OUR
CRASHES.
I KNOW WE'RE WE'RE WE'RE
WORKING WITH MORE LIMITED
CAPACITY THAN SOME OTHER LARGER
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE US.
BUT FOR EXAMPLE, I'M LOOKING AT
ANALISE BOSTON AND THEY'RE KIND
OF VISION ZERO FATALITY RECORDS
AND I THINK THERE THERE SEEMS
TO BE A MOVE A LITTLE BIT IN
TERMS OF BRINGING TO THE
FOREFRONT SOME OF THOSE SOME
OF THE STUFF THAT'S HAPPENING
MORE ON THE PRIVATE YOU KNOW,
YOUR VOLUNTEER EFFORTS IN THE
COMMUNITY THAT THAT PETE'S
DOING SOMETIMES THAT THAT WORK
AND IS BEING IS BEING SHARED
MORE TRANSPARENTLY FROM WITHIN
CITY GOVERNMENTS AND THEN
ADDITIONAL SORT OF ANALYSIS
MAYBE HAPPENING AS WELL.
I KNOW WE'RE DOING THE THE
ENGINEERING PIECE I GUESS THE
QUESTION THIS AROUND THIS IS
ARE THERE PRACTICES THAT WE'VE
SHIFTED SHIFTED INTERNALLY IN
TERMS OF HOW WE'RE APPROACHING
CRASHES AND SORT OF THAT
CONNECTION BETWEEN THE WORK
THAT APD DOING AND THEN WHAT
WE'RE DOING FROM THE
ENGINEERING SIDE HAS THAT
SHIFTED?
HAVE WE ADDED ADDITIONAL
COMPONENTS SINCE WE'VE SORT
OF INCREASINGLY BEGUN TO
EMBRACE A MORE VISION ZERO
MINDSET?
ARE THERE THINGS THAT YOU'RE
SEEING HAPPENING IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE
INTERESTING THAT YOU'RE
THINKING YEAH, THAT MIGHT BE
THE NEXT WAVE FOR US IF WE'RE
ABLE TO BUILD OUR CAPACITY IN X
ZWAI OR Y?
YEAH, MAYBE I CAN TAKE A FIRST
CRACK AT THIS.
I ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS THAT
WE'VE TRIED TO DO IS REALLY
STRENGTHEN OUR COMMUNICATION
PROTOCOLS SO THAT WHEN A CRASH
DOES OCCUR FOLKS ON LIEUTENANT
SERVICE TEAM REACH OUT TO US
AND I THINK THAT HAS CONTINUED
TO IMPROVE OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS.
WE TALKED ABOUT A SUBJECT
SIMILAR TO THIS BACK IN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE WHICH MANY OF THE
COMMISSION MEMBERS DID WORK ON
THE COMMISSION AT THAT TIME.
SO I'M HAPPY THAT WE'RE HAVING
THIS CONVERSATION AGAIN.
BUT I'LL SAY SINCE TWENTY
TWENTY ONE WHEN WE HAD A
CONVERSATION THEN TO NOW WE
REALLY TRY TO STRENGTHEN THOSE
COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS.
I HAVE A MONTHLY CHECK IN WITH
ANDY BAYNOR FROM THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND REALLY WE TRY TO
COORDINATE ON CRASHES AND
THINGS WHEN THEY OCCUR BUT THEN
ALSO SPECIAL GAME DAY
OPERATIONS OR WHATEVER THE CASE
MAY BE.
LIEUTENANT SHERBETS PUT ME IN
TOUCH WITH CAPITALLY WHO YOU
MENTIONED EARLIER KIND
OF CHARGED WITH THE CRASH UNIT
AND SO I'VE HAD A COUPLE
OF CONVERSATIONS WITH HIM.
SO YOU KNOW, I THINK REALLY
JUST SHARING THAT INFORMATION
BACK AND FORTH IS REALLY
CRITICAL SO THAT WE UNDERSTAND
YOU HAVE A SHARED PERSPECTIVE
ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENING AND KIND
OF THOSE ROLES RESPONSIBILITIES
AND THEN WHEN A CRASH DOES
OCCUR WE KNOW WHO TO CALL.
WE CAN TALK TO ONE ANOTHER
PRETTY REGULARLY AND WE FEEL
COMFORTABLE DOING SO.
AND I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
IMPROVEMENTS I'VE SEEN SINCE
TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
>> LET ME ASK YOU THIS
PRESENTATION
OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS BE SO IT REALLY DOES
SOUND LIKE THE ENGINEERING TEAM
IS PUTTING A LOT OF EFFORT TO
KNOW VISITING CRASH SITES AND
THEN REVIEWING THEM WHAT IS THE
RIGHT WAY TO SHARE THAT
INFORMATION?
I WILL WILL I WANT TO CREDIT
YOU AND YOUR TEAM WITH THAT THE
DASHBOARD, THE CRASH MAP AND
THE OTHER SORT OF HISTORICAL
AND TREND BASED UM DATA SOURCES
THAT YOU MAKE AVAILABLE ONLINE
.
UM, MY I GOT MY HARSHEST
CRITICISM OF OF THEM THOUGH IS
THAT THEY ARE NOT TIMELY.
RIGHT.
I MEAN WE GOT DATA FROM TWENTY
TWENTY TWO IN THOSE SOURCES NOW
I THE VISUALIZATION THOUGH AND
THE ORGANIZATION OF IT IS VERY
GOOD BUT IT'S IT'S NOT UP TO
DATE BY WAY OF COMPARISON WE'VE
GOT PLACES LIKE PORTLAND THAT
UM SHARE INFORMATION ABOUT
THEIR CRASHES AND AND WHAT THEY
HAVE DONE TO ADDRESS THOSE
SPECIFIC PLACES.
RIGHT.
THEY HAVE INFORMATION ON THEIR
WEBSITE RIGHT NOW ABOUT CRASHES
FROM DECEMBER OF TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND THAT INCLUDES THE
INFRASTRUCTURE CHANGES THAT
HAVE BEEN PUT IN PLACE TO TRY
TO MITIGATE THAT PROBLEM AND
PREVENT FUTURE SIMILAR CRASHES.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT DECEMBER
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE FOR FIVE
MONTHS AGO NO WHAT WHAT IS THE
WAY FOR YOU TO SHARE THAT.
WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY TO GET
THAT OUT INTO THE COMMUNITY?
I MEAN IF A CRASH HAPPENS NEAR
MY HOUSE, WHAT IS THE RIGHT WAY
FOR FOR ME AND MY NEIGHBORS TO
KNOW THAT UM YOU KNOW THAT THE
PROBLEM HAS BEEN FIXED OR THAT
A SMART PERSON HAS EVALUATED IT
AND MADE SURE THAT THE PROBLEM
WASN'T DUE TO UM YOU KNOW, AN
INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEM OR LIKE
YOU SAID LIKE WHAT'S WHAT'S THE
RIGHT WAY TO GET THAT OUT IN
THE COMMUNITY SO THAT PEOPLE
CAN REST EASY KNOWING THAT IT'S
BEING DEALT WITH
?
YEAH, I THINK IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION.
I DON'T KNOW IF I HAVE A GREAT
IMMEDIATE ANSWER.
YOU KNOW, AGAIN, ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY WE TRY TO TRACK
THIS OVER TIME IS TO REALLY
HAVE A GOOD UNDERSTANDING ABOUT
WHERE THE PATTERNS ARE, WHERE
THE CONCENTRATIONS OF CONCERN
ARE SO THAT WE CAN REALLY MAKE
INVESTMENTS THAT ARE GOING TO
HAVE THE MOST IMPACT IN TERMS
OF OUR FOLLOW RESPONSE TO A
SPECIFIC CRASH.
YEAH, WE HAVEN'T DOCUMENTED
THAT.
WE'VE BEEN SHARING THE SORT
OF CRASH REPORTS THAT ARE
PROVIDED TO CITY COUNCIL ON A
MONTHLY BASIS.
THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'VE BEEN DOING.
BUT IN TERMS OF THE SORT
OF COUNTERMEASURE OR WHAT THE
RESULT OF THE INVESTIGATION HAS
BEEN, WE HAVEN'T DONE THAT.
I I CAN THINK THROUGH HOW WE
COULD POSSIBLY PUT SOMETHING
TOGETHER.
I HAVE TO PROBABLY GO BACK AND
TALK TO SOME OF MY
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS TO
WHICH ARE CERTIFIED
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY OFFICIALS
THROUGH A CERTIFICATION
PROGRAM.
SO SO THEY HAVE A DEEP
UNDERSTANDING THAT BEING
SIMPKIN CYRUSONE PARTICULAR SO
SO WE CAN MAYBE BRAINSTORM ON
THAT AND COME BACK TO YOU THE
OTHER I JUST WANT TO MENTION
ONE OTHER THING I DID WANT TO
ADD ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WAS
INSIGHTFUL WHEN I SPOKE TO
COREY RECENTLY IS ONE OF THE
HEARTBURN ISSUES YOU'VE HEARD
FROM ME IN THE PAST IS THAT IN
OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT IS JUST
ONE OF SEVERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES THAT REPORTS TO A
CRASH SCENE.
THE OTHERS OBVIOUSLY BEING THE
SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT,
UNIVERSITY SERVICES AND THE
STATE POLICE AND SO IN TALKING
TO HIM, I DID NOT REALIZE THAT
THE FATALITY THAT INVOLVED A
SCOOTER WRITER ON HILL STREET
LAST YEAR IT WAS NOT IN OUR
COUNTY THAT ACTUALLY REPLIED
WAS FIRST RESPONDER ON THAT I
BELIEVE I FORGET WHICH OF THE
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES WAS
BUT I KNOW YOU ACTUALLY CALL
THIS OUT THAT ONE OF THE
MONTHLY REPORTS DID NOT INCLUDE
THAT CRASH AND I CAME TO FIND
OUT THAT THE REASON WHY IT
WASN'T INCLUDED IS BECAUSE IT
WAS AN INTERIOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT THAT WAS THE THE
FIRST AGENCY ON SCENE TO REPLY
TO THAT.
SO THAT'S WHY I'VE ALWAYS BEEN
YOU'VE ALWAYS HEARD ME KIND
OF REFER BACK TO THE OFFICIAL
DATA SET BECAUSE ALL REPORTING
AGENCIES REPORT INTO THAT STATE
DATABASE AND THEN WE DOWNLOAD
THAT ON AN ANNUAL BASIS.
I RECOGNIZE THAT THAT'S MORE
LONG TERM AND IT'S NOT AS
IMMEDIATE.
IT DOESN'T GIVE THE REAL TIME.
BUT THAT'S ONE EXAMPLE OF HOW
THERE WAS THAT BLIND SPOT BOTH
IN TERMS OF ANN ARBOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT REPORTED OUT TO CITY
COUNCIL AND WHY I FOUND OUT
ABOUT IT THROUGH THE
NEWS ARTICLE AND WHY SOMEONE
FROM APD DIDN'T GIVE ME A CALL
BECAUSE THEY WEREN'T THE
REPORTING AGENCY.
SO SO AGAIN, IT'S IT'S A LITTLE
BIT OF A BLIND SPOT.
IT MIGHT BE ONE THAT WE CAN
SOLVE FOR.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'RE JUST TRYING TO THINK
THROUGH AND IN TERMS OF HOW
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN OTHER LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES RESPOND.
>> THANK YOU, RAYMOND.
YES.
I WOULD LIKE YOU TO THINK ABOUT
IT THE RIGHT WAY TO DO THAT AND
WE CAN MAYBE ADD THAT ON AS A
SUBSEQUENT AGENDA TOPIC THAT
WOULD BE GREAT DENHA ANOTHER
MEETING AND JUST TO CLARIFY ONE
POINT AS THE RAYMOND'S COMMENT
REGARDING THE OTHER AGENCY
INVESTIGATIONS SO ANYTHING IN
OUR CITY IS OUR JURISDICTION.
THAT SAID, THE CITY ALSO DOES
PARTICIPATE COUNTYWIDE CRASH
TEAM SO WITH MICHIGAN STATE
POLICE, WITH UNIVERSITY MISSION
AND PUBLIC SAFETY WITH WASHOE
COUNTY SHERIFF SO OUR
INVESTIGATORS ARE NOT AVAILABLE
TO RESPOND TO THE SERIOUS CRASH
THAT I MENTIONED EARLIER.
THE NEXT COURSE OF ACTION IS
LET'S GET SOMEONE ELSE FROM THE
CRASH TEAM TO RESPOND.
SO IN THAT CASE THE SCOOTER
RIDER ON HILL STREET IT WAS I
BELIEVE WAS WASHINGTON COUNTY
THAT DEPUTY THAT RESPONDED TO
THAT LOCATION WAS THE PRIMARY
ADVANCED INVESTIGATOR NOT SO
THE INITIAL INITIAL WASN'T A
POLICE OFFICER BUT THE ADVANCED
INVESTIGATION WAS NOT DONE BY
US AND THAT DOES HAPPEN
OCCASIONALLY.
IT'S NOT THE NORMALIZES.
I THINK WE HAVE SEVEN TRAINED
INVESTIGATORS OR
RECONSTRUCTIONISTS NOW.
SO NORMALLY ONE IS AVAILABLE
BUT IN THAT INSTANCE THERE WAS
NOT OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS
IF THEY'RE ALL RIGHT THAT IT
WAS DONE UNTIL YOU MADE THAT
LAST COMMENT.
BUT ON THAT POINT, IF YOU FEEL
LIKE THERE IS A PRETTY COMMON I
MEAN OBVIOUSLY THEY'RE GOING TO
THE SAME TRAINING USING
DIFFERENT BUT IS IS THERE ANY
DIFFERENCE IN MAYBE HOW THE
COUNTY MIGHT APPROACH AN
INVESTIGATION LIKE THIS?
I COULD JUST IN TERMS
OF THINKING ABOUT THINKING
ABOUT THIS OBVIOUSLY IT HAS
QUITE AN IMPACT IF THERE WERE
ACROSS THE COUNTY SO JUST
CURIOUS.
YEAH, I'M GOING TO SAY I
BELIEVE SO BUT I I'M NOT ON THE
QUESTION MYSELF.
I KNOW THEY ALL HAVE THE SAME
TRAINING AND NONE I DON'T DON'T
THEY'LL GO THROUGH THE SAME
TRAINING THEY'RE PROBABLY ALL
AT DIFFERENT LEVELS WITHIN
THEIR INVESTIGATOR RECONSTRUCT
THE STATUS BUT BECAUSE THEY ARE
TRAINED WELL TRAINED BY THE
STATE POLICE I BELIEVE THAT THE
PROTOCOLS AND THE INVESTIGATIVE
TECHNIQUES THAT YOU SHOULD BE
CONSISTENT WITH FROM ONE AGENCY
TO THE NEXT AND THEY DO ALSO
JOINT TRAINING WHERE THEY ALL
GATHER TOGETHER.
AND SO I'M GOING TO SAY TO THE
BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE, YES, THAT
WOULD BE CONSISTENT FROM WHAT
180 TO ANOTHER
.
RIGHT.
BUT WE HAVE A POTENTIAL FUTURE
AGENDA TOPIC.
BUT THANKS SO MUCH, LIEUTENANT.
YOUR RAYMOND FOR PUTTING THIS
TOGETHER AND WALKING US THROUGH
THIS TOPIC WE HAVE DISCUSSED IN
A LONG TIME.
I KNOW I'VE LEARNED A LOT SO
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
NEXT IT WILL BE THE STAFF
REPORT AND UPDATES SHOULD HAVE
RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT WRITING
PROJECT UPDATES WITH THE AGENDA
MATERIALS.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU WOULDN'T
MIND REVIEWING.
ALL RIGHT.
SO I WILL GO THROUGH AND
HIGHLIGHT THE CHANGES.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF PROJECTS
THE BEGINNING OF THE REPORT
THAT WE KIND OF RECYCLE JUST
BECAUSE THEY'RE YOU KNOW, THEY
HAVE SOME GOOD LINKS AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO THE TWENTY TWENTY
RESURFACING PROJECT THAT WILL
WRAP UP THIS YEAR AND THEN THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THERE ARE NO
REAL PROJECT CHANGES, SIDEWALK
GAPS THE SAME THING.
SO WE TEND TO JUST RECYCLE
THOSE MONTH OVER MONTH BECAUSE
THEY TEND TO BE A TOPIC
OF INTEREST STATE AND HELP
PROJECTS.
I'M SURE YOU ARE PROBABLY WELL
AWARE AS MUCH OF THE COMMUNITY
IS THAT CONSTRUCTION SEASON HAS
BEGUN.
THE GOOD NEWS IS IT STARTED A
LITTLE EARLY BECAUSE THE
WEATHER WAS A LITTLE BIT MORE
FAVORABLE.
NORMALLY FROST LAWS DON'T COME
OFF UNTIL RIGHT ABOUT NOW MID
APRIL BUT BY THE END OF MARCH
THINGS WERE LOOKING PRETTY GOOD
.
SO SOME PROJECTS PICKED UP THAT
FIRST WEEK OF APRIL.
SO THE GOOD NEWS THOSE PROJECTS
HAVE STARTED, THE BAD
NEWS PROJECTS HAVE STARTED SO
IT'S A LITTLE DIFFICULT TO GET
AROUND CERTAIN PARTS OF TOWN.
SOME OF THOSE ARE CITY
PROJECTS.
BUT I REMIND A LOT
OF INTERESTED CALLERS THAT I
GET THAT NOW ALL PROJECTS OR
CITIES.
RIGHT.
IT'S SOME OF IT IS RELATED TO
EL BELLFIELD UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN DORM PROJECT.
THEN THERE'S PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT AND SO WHEN YOU
KIND OF PUT ALL THESE THINGS
TOGETHER IN SHORTEN
CONSTRUCTION SEASON TENDS TO BE
SOMETIMES DIFFICULT TO MAKE
SOME OF THOSE DETOURS
UNAVOIDABLE AND SOMETIMES
GETTING AROUND CERTAIN PARTS
OF TOWN CAN BE DIFFICULT.
SO WE RECOGNIZE CAN BE HARD FOR
THE TRAVELING PUBLIC NO MATTER
YOUR MODE OF TRANSPORTATION.
BUT SOMETIMES IT'S IT'S
UNAVOIDABLE DEPENDING ON THE
WORK THAT'S PROGRAMED TO PROVE
TO BE CARRIED FORWARD.
>> SO ANYWAY, STEVEN HILL HAS
STARTED IT'S EXPECTED TO FINISH
UP IN AUGUST HIS MEDICAL CENTER
DRIVE CONSTRUCTION ALSO JUST
STARTED SO THERE ARE SOME KIND
OF SIGNAL CHANGES THAT ARE IN
EFFECT OVER THERE AT MADE AND
FULLER.
SO A LOT OF THAT IS JUST SOME
PREP WORK AND SOME OF THE
HEAVIER WORK WILL COME A LITTLE
BIT LATER.
>> MILLER AVENUE, YOU KNOW
WE'VE BEEN REPORTING ON THIS IN
THE PAST.
NOT A LOT OF CHANGES.
WE DID UPDATE THE PROJECT
DESCRIPTION TO INCLUDE SPEED
MANAGEMENT JUST TO MAKE SURE WE
HIGHLIGHT THAT AS PART OF THE
PROJECT 7TH STREET AND
GREENVIEW CONSTRUCTION IS
SCHEDULED TO BEGIN LATER THIS
MONTH PROBABLY ON THE S 7TH
STREET PORTION DOWN THERE BY
LORTON ELEMENTARY AND THEN
IT'LL MOVE UP TO THE GREENVIEW
PORTION BOTH SOUTH OF CYO AND
THE NORTH SIDE WHICH WAS SILO
AND STADIUM.
>> PITTSFIELD VILLAGE IS A
LARGE PROJECT AREA FOR WATER
MAIN REPLACEMENT STORM
IMPROVEMENTS SANITORIUM AND
ROAD RESURFACING DESIGN JUST
STARTED ON THAT BUT IS NOT
EXPECTED TO COMMENCE
CONSTRUCTION UNTIL NEXT YEAR
END UP COORDINATION.
I WANTED TO GIVE YOU ALL A
LITTLE BIT OF A SHOUT OUTS.
YOU MAY RECALL THAT YOU PASSED
A RESOLUTION LAST YEAR
ENCOURAGING ME TO MAKE BETTER
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN
ACCOMMODATIONS ACROSS US.
TWENTY THREE AS WELL AS
DISCOURAGE ANYTHING THAT WOULD
ADD CAPACITY TO THE FREEWAY
SYSTEM.
SO INTERESTINGLY ENOUGH WE HAVE
SEEN SOME PRELIMINARY DESIGNS
FROM NOT THAT THEY ARE TAKING
AT LEAST PART OF THAT
RESOLUTION SERIOUSLY.
THEY ARE LOOKING AT
INCORPORATING NON MOTORIZED
CONNECTIONS ACROSS US.
TWENTY THREE ON THE CROSSROADS
WE'VE SEEN SOME CONCEPTS THAT
INCLUDE BIKE LANES OR PATHWAYS
OR SIDEWALKS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO YOU ALL SHOULD BE PROUD
OF THAT ACCOMPLISHMENT AND
OBVIOUSLY KUDOS TO COUNCIL AS
WELL FOR PASSING THAT
RESOLUTION.
AND THEN I ALSO WANTED TO TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT CITY COUNCIL
PASSED A RESOLUTION IN SUPPORT
OF THE RIDE'S PROPOSAL TO
EXPLORE ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS ON
US.
TWENTY THREE THIS IS MORE LIKE
A TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
APPROACH.
SO INSTEAD OF JUST BUILDING
MORE ROADWAYS, ARE THERE BETTER
WAYS WE CAN MOVE PEOPLE ALONG
THIS
CORRIDORS THROUGH THINGS
LIKE TRANSIT?
AND SO I THINK THE RIDE HAD
CHAMPIONED THIS AS A POSSIBLE
SOLUTION SET AND CITY COUNCIL
ADOPTED IT AS WELL.
AND SO ANYWAY, THERE'S A LOT
OF CONVERSATION STILL GOING ON
AROUND THE PROJECT BUT I WILL
SAY THAT THERE ARE SOME CHANGES
THAT ARE HAPPENING AS A RESULT
OF SOME OF THE COMMUNITY
CONVERSATIONS THAT ARE
HAPPENING HERE LOCALLY
STREETLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION.
FOUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHT
STREETLIGHTS SO FAR AND TWENTY
ONE FOR TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM
SUBMITTALS.
WHAT YOU HEARD BACK IN I THINK
FEBRUARY BYRNE AURLIEN HENRY
THOSE ARE SCHEDULED TO GO TO
COUNCIL IN JUNE.
THIS IS LARGELY A FUNCTION
OF JUST KNOWING HOW MUCH BUDGET
THERE IS TO SUPPORT THE
PROJECTS IN THE NEXT FISCAL
YEAR SO THAT WE KNOW IF IT'LL
BE A FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY FIVE CONSTRUCTIONS IS IN
OUR FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY SIXTH OR BEYOND AND WE
HAVE KICKED OFF THE NEXT THREE
PETITIONS.
SO MACHON FROM CYO CHURCH TO
DELAWARE OUR WARDEN FROM
JACKSON TO DEXTER AND TRAMER
FROM BART TO JOHN WOODS ALL HAD
THEIR FIRST MEETINGS IN LATE
MARCH OR APRIL 2ND.
MEETINGS WILL BE A COUPLE
MONTHS OUT SO I SUSPECT YOU'LL
SEE THOSE COME BEFORE YOU
SOMETIME SOME QUICK BUILD
PROGRAMS WE DID CLOSE THE
SURVEY GOT NEARLY TWO HUNDRED
AND FIFTY RESPONSES AND WE'LL
GIVE YOU A SUMMARY OF WHAT WE
HEARD HOPEFULLY IN MAY THE
ANNUAL SNAPSHOT I COVERED THIS
LAST MONTH BUT I THINK SOMEONE
HAD NOTED THAT THE LINK DROP SO
I WENT AHEAD AND PUT THIS ONE
BACK IN JUST SO THAT YOU CAN
ACCESS THE LINK SO AGAIN, IF
YOU HAVEN'T HAD THE CHANCE TO
LOOK AT THAT, IT DOES TALK
ABOUT SOME OF THE
ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN THE LAST
CALENDAR YEAR FOR TWENTY TWENTY
THREE SAFE STREETS FOR ALL WE
ARE FINALLY KIND OF OUT OF THE
STUCK MODE TOOK US THE BETTER
PART OF A YEAR TO GET A
CONTRACT FINALIZED WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION THAT WAS
DONE IN I THINK LATE JANUARY
EARLY FEBRUARY.
SO THEN WE FINALIZED ALL OF OUR
AFPS THERE IS AN RFP ON THE
STREET RIGHT NOW SO IF YOU KNOW
ANY GOOD CONSULTING FIRMS AND
WOULD LIKE TO SEE THEM HELP US
ADVANCE VISION ZERO WORK
THROUGH THIS SAFE STREETS
PROGRAM PLEASE LET THEM KNOW IT
IS FOCUSED SPECIFICALLY ON
GREEN ADMINISTRATION QUICK
BUILDS AND SPEED MANAGEMENT SO
SOME VERY HIGH PROFILE
IMPACTFUL PROJECTS WE DID BREAK
OUT NEAR MISS ANALYTICS THROUGH
A SEPARATE RFP OR ACTUALLY
THROUGH A SEPARATE CONTRACT
BECAUSE WE FELT THE SKILLSET
WAS MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
SO WE ARE FINALIZING A CONTRACT
WITH A CONSULTING FIRM TO
ASSIST US WITH THAT PROGRAM
OVERSIGHT AS WELL.
THEY'LL BE HELPING DEVELOP THE
RFP FOR ACTUALLY GETTING A
VENDOR TO COME IN AND PROVIDE
THE ENORMOUS ANALYTICS FOR US
SO SO AGAIN THERE IS SOME
MOVEMENT ON THIS THESE TWO MORE
OF THESE ASPECTS OF THE PROJECT
WHICH IS EXCITED AN UPDATE FROM
PLANNING IS THE UPDATE TO THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE AND IN
PARTICULAR UPDATES TO
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS.
SO IF YOU AREN'T AWARE ONE
OF THE THINGS MY TEAM DOES IS
ANY TIME THERE'S PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT, WHETHER IT'S A
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE, HOME
AND NEIGHBORHOOD TO A EIGHTEEN
STOREY BUILDING, MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE WHATEVER
THE CASE MAY BE, I ASSIGN THOSE
THOSE REVIEWS COME IN THROUGH
THE PROJECT AND PERMIT TRACKING
PROGRAM WHICH IS NOW CALLED
DREAM BEFORE USED TO BE CALLED
TRACK IT AND WE REVIEW THOSE
FOR TRANSPORTATION NOW SMALLER
PROJECTS ARE NOT VERY
IMPACTFUL.
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE IS NOT
VERY IMPACTFUL WHEN IT COMES TO
TRANSPORTATION.
BUT AS YOU CAN IMAGINE A GIANT
18 FOOT OR I'M SORRY 18 STOREY
BUILDING WOULD HAVE A MUCH
BIGGER IMPACT.
SO THERE WAS SOME OUTDATED
LANGUAGE IN THE CODE THAT
TALKED ABOUT LEVEL OF SERVICE
AND TRYING TO MAINTAIN A LEVEL
OF SERVICE TO THAT LEVEL
OF SERVICE WAS LARGELY FOCUSED
ON VEHICULAR LEVEL OF SERVICE
THAT IS OUTDATED.
NONE OF OUR CONTEMPORARY POLICY
DOCUMENTS SUGGEST WE SHOULD BE
MAINTAINING LEVEL OF SERVICE
FOR VEHICLES.
SO WHAT WE DID IS INSTEAD KIND
OF UPDATE IT TO BE MULTIMODAL
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS.
>> SO THE IDEA IS WE REALLY
WANT TO UNDERSTAND IMPACTS TO
ALL MODES OF TRANSPORTATION.
WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS
OF PEDESTRIANS?
WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS TO TRANSIT
USERS?
WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS TO
CYCLISTS AND VEHICLE USERS?
WHAT IS THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF TRIPS?
WHAT DOES THAT TRIP BREAKDOWN
LOOK LIKE?
RIGHT.
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE EXPECTED TO
WALK?
BIKE?
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE EXPECTED TO
>> HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE EXPECTED
BIKE?
TO USE BUS, SO FORTH AND SO ON
>> HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE EXPECTED
AND HOW WELL DOES THE PROJECT
TO USE BUS, SO FORTH AND SO ON
ACCOMMODATE IT?
AND HOW WELL DOES THE PROJECT
SO THIS CHANGE AND KIND
ACCOMMODATE IT?
OF UPDATE TO THOSE
SO THIS CHANGE AND KIND
CODE REQUIREMENTS WENT TO
OF UPDATE TO THOSE
PLANNING COMMISSION I BELIEVE
CODE REQUIREMENTS WENT TO
LATE LAST YEAR AND THEN DID GO
PLANNING COMMISSION I BELIEVE
TO CITY COUNCIL LAST MONTH FOR
LATE LAST YEAR AND THEN DID GO
FIRST READING AND I BELIEVE WAS
TO CITY COUNCIL LAST MONTH FOR
APPROVED JUST THE OTHER NIGHT
FIRST READING AND I BELIEVE WAS
ON MONDAY NIGHT.
APPROVED JUST THE OTHER NIGHT
SO SO WE'VE ACTUALLY KIND
ON MONDAY NIGHT.
OF INFORMALLY BEEN DOING THIS
SO SO WE'VE ACTUALLY KIND
FOR A WHILE.
OF INFORMALLY BEEN DOING THIS
WE'VE BEEN ASKING DEVELOPERS
FOR A WHILE.
FOR BEING MORE THOUGHTFUL ABOUT
WE'VE BEEN ASKING DEVELOPERS
HAVING A SORT OF MULTIMODAL
FOR BEING MORE THOUGHTFUL ABOUT
APPROACH.
HAVING A SORT OF MULTIMODAL
BUT THIS KIND OF PUTS IT IN
APPROACH.
CEMENTED IN STONE NOW.
BUT THIS KIND OF PUTS IT IN
SO THEN THAT WAY THERE'S NO
CEMENTED IN STONE NOW.
AMBIGUITY.
SO THEN THAT WAY THERE'S NO
IT'S US TRYING TO OVERREACH AND
AMBIGUITY.
ASK FOR SOMETHING THAT ISN'T
IT'S US TRYING TO OVERREACH AND
REQUIRED NOW SPELLED OUT THAT
ASK FOR SOMETHING THAT ISN'T
IT IS REQUIRED AND IT IS
REQUIRED NOW SPELLED OUT THAT
ALIGNING WITH BEST PRACTICES.
IT IS REQUIRED AND IT IS
SO IT DOES HELP US REALLY THINK
ALIGNING WITH BEST PRACTICES.
THROUGH CAN WE CAN WE GET
SO IT DOES HELP US REALLY THINK
CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS AS PART
THROUGH CAN WE CAN WE GET
OF A YOU KNOW, OFFSET
CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS AS PART
IMPROVEMENT THAT'S REQUIRED BY
OF A YOU KNOW, OFFSET
THE DEVELOPER?
IMPROVEMENT THAT'S REQUIRED BY
>> WE'VE DONE THAT ON SEVERAL
THE DEVELOPER?
PROJECTS OVER THE YEARS BUT
>> WE'VE DONE THAT ON SEVERAL
THIS REALLY HELPS THEM.
PROJECTS OVER THE YEARS BUT
WE'RE CONTINUING WITH OUR LUNCH
THIS REALLY HELPS THEM.
AND LEARNING SERIES.
WE'RE CONTINUING WITH OUR LUNCH
WE HAVE ONE MORE IN THE CURRENT
AND LEARNING SERIES.
SERIES RELATED TO MAINTENANCE
WE HAVE ONE MORE IN THE CURRENT
OF TRAFFIC FOR BICYCLISTS
SERIES RELATED TO MAINTENANCE
DURING CONSTRUCTION AND THEN
OF TRAFFIC FOR BICYCLISTS
AFTER THAT ONE IS COMPLETE WILL
DURING CONSTRUCTION AND THEN
PROBABLY REASSESS AGAIN AS A
AFTER THAT ONE IS COMPLETE WILL
REMINDER THESE EDUCATION
PROBABLY REASSESS AGAIN AS A
ENCOURAGEMENT SERIES ARE REALLY
REMINDER THESE EDUCATION
FOR INTERNAL STAFF BECAUSE WHAT
ENCOURAGEMENT SERIES ARE REALLY
WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS REALLY
FOR INTERNAL STAFF BECAUSE WHAT
MAKE SURE THAT MULTIPLE
WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS REALLY
DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE CITY
MAKE SURE THAT MULTIPLE
REALLY UNDERSTAND THE VISION
DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE CITY
ZERO PLAN AND ARE REALLY TRYING
REALLY UNDERSTAND THE VISION
TO KIND OF WORK INTO THEIR
ZERO PLAN AND ARE REALLY TRYING
DAILY LIVES AND THE WORK THAT
TO KIND OF WORK INTO THEIR
WE DO DAY IN, DAY OUT AND THEN
DAILY LIVES AND THE WORK THAT
I'LL DEFER THE WRITE UPDATES TO
WE DO DAY IN, DAY OUT AND THEN
MR. CARPENTER WHEN WE GO TO
I'LL DEFER THE WRITE UPDATES TO
COMMISSION MEMBERS IT'S THE
MR. CARPENTER WHEN WE GO TO
ONLY QUESTIONS OTHERWISE THEY
COMMISSION MEMBERS IT'S THE
STEP UP TO ALL RIGHT, THEY'RE
ONLY QUESTIONS OTHERWISE THEY
MOVING ON TO LIAISON REPORTS SO
STEP UP TO ALL RIGHT, THEY'RE
THE COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE AS
MOVING ON TO LIAISON REPORTS SO
A LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
THE COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE AS
ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED TO
A LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
PROVIDE A BRIEF REPORT
TO THANK
YOU.
WE HAD A FEW ANNEXATIONS
OF TOWNSHIP ISLANDS NEAR HERE
ON RIVER YESTERDAY OR LAST
NIGHT AT PLANNING COMMISSION
NOT PARTICULARLY RELEVANT.
>> THE ONLY OTHER SITE PLAN
THAT MAY BE RELEVANT IS ON
HOOVER.
I THINK IT'S ONE TO HOOVER.
IT WAS A SITE PLAN FOR THE
REDEVELOPMENT OF A CAR REPAIR
FACILITY.
IT'S RIGHT ACROSS THE HOOVER
AND GREEN BUT IT WILL BE AN
EXPANDED CAR FACILITY.
BUT THAT BEING SAID, IT'S RIGHT
NEXT STADIUM.
BUT THE COMPLY WITH ALL
REGULATIONS JUST WANT TO GIVE
YOU GUYS A HEADS UP AS FAR AS
TRANSPORTATION SIMILAR TO THE
STATE AND PACKARD UPDATE THAT
YOU GUYS HAD THAT WERE TWO D I
THINK COUNCIL'S ALREADY HEARD
ONE OF THEM BUT THERE'S ANOTHER
ONE COMING TO COUNCIL ON PACARD
STATE ON THAT ONE IS ABOUT
FIFTEEN ISH STORIES.
IT'S IT'S A PRETTY SIGNIFICANT
OF ASSEMBLY AND ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE TALKED ABOUT
PLANNING WAS JUST HOW DAUNTING
THAT INTERSECTION IS THE STATE
AND PACKARD THE CROSS SECTIONS
ARE NOT REALLY CONDUCIVE FOR
LEGIBILITY FOR ANY IS CARS IS
IT PEDESTRIANS AND SO THAT
BEING SAID, IF YOU ARE ABLE TO
CREATE A LOT OF DENSITY THROUGH
THE USE PUDI ON THAT SOUTHERN
SIDE AND PERHAPS THE EMPHASIS
FOR PEDESTRIANS CAN ACTUALLY
HAPPEN BECAUSE IT'S KIND OF A
WEIRD THAT RETAIL SO THERE SO
BUT I THINK THAT ONE SHOULD
COME TO CITY COUNCIL PRETTY
SOON THAT THAT WAS ABOUT THREE
WEEKS AGO SO OTHER THAN THAT
YEAH THAT'S PRETTY MUCH ABOUT
JUST ONE TO GIVE YOU GUYS A
HEADS UP.
THANKS.
THANK YOU MATT.
>> THANKS.
AS RAYMOND SAID, DISCUSSIONS
WITH M DOT PERTAINING TO US
TWENTY THREE ARE GOING VERY
WELL.
CITY COUNCIL DID SUPPORT THE
IDEA OF ASKING THEM TO WORK
WITH US ON A TEAM SOLUTION
INSTEAD OF ADDING ROADWAY
CAPACITY.
WE'VE HAD ONE DISCUSSION I
CHARACTERIZE THIS A VERY
CONSTRUCTIVE BRAINSTORMING
CONVERSATION AND OTHER THAN
THAT WE'RE VERY BUSY.
WE'RE BEGINNING THE PUBLIC
INVOLVEMENT FOR THE REBUILDING
OF THE YPSILANTI BUS CENTER IN
DOWNTOWN YPSILANTI AND GOT A
LOT OF REQUESTS GOING INTO THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT THIS WEEK
FOR GRANTS FOR ZERO EMISSIONS
BUSSES.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED ABOUT THAT.
SO THAT'S MOVING FORWARD.
THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO REPORT.
THANKS.
THANK YOU, ERIKA ALREADY SPOKE
A LITTLE BIT TO THE BUDGET
PROCESS BUT JUST WANTED TO IT
SO EVERYBODY SHOULD KNOW THAT
COSTA WILL ADOPT ANNUAL BUDGET
AT THE SECOND MEETING IN MAY
AND SO WE HAVE THE FORMAL
BUDGET PRESENTATION ON MONDAY
NIGHT.
OBVIOUSLY WE GOT TRANSPORTATION
AT THAT BROKEN DOWN FROM
TRANSPORTATION PERSPECTIVE
TONIGHT.
BUT IF YOU WANT TO DIG IN MORE
ON THIS, YOU CAN GO TO THE
CITY'S WEBSITE AND I'M GOING TO
TRY TO GET A LINK ACTUALLY ON
THE BUDGET BUDGET PROCESS PAGE
.
BUT YOU CAN RIGHT NOW FIND THE
FULL DRAFT BUDGET BOOK WHICH IS
LONG I THINK IT'S LIKE 400 PLUS
PAGES.
SO YOU MAY NOT WANT TO READ
EVERY PAGE THOUGH I WILL BE
TRYING TO TAKE A LOOK AT MOST
OF THE BINDER BUT YOU CAN SCAN
THROUGH JUST A TRANSPORTATION
IF YOU WISH AND JUST GOOGLE
LIKE IN THE SEARCH
ENGINE FOR
THE CITY'S WEBSITE APPLI TWENTY
FIVE BUDGET DRAFT BUDGET AND
YOU'LL SEE THAT FEDERAL BUDGET
WILL COME UP AND COUNCIL MEMBER
AKMAN AS YOU MIGHT SUSPECT IN
THE ONES MOST INTERESTED IN
TRANSPORTATION.
SO WE'RE GOING TO BE HAVING
CONVERSATIONS BUT WE CAN HAVE
COUNCIL PROCESSES.
WE SUBMIT QUESTIONS AND THOSE
ANSWERS COME OUT EVERY FRIDAY
AND THOSE ARE POSTED FOR
EVERYBODY TO READ ON
TRANSPORTATION.
EVERY OTHER QUESTION THAT MIGHT
COME UP ON THE PROCESS ON THAT
BUDGET PAGE.
BUT IF YOU'VE GOT QUESTIONS AS
YOU'RE GOING THROUGH, PLEASE
SEND ON MY WAY.
MAYBE I'LL KNOW THE ANSWER.
MAYBE I WON'T MAYBE SPARK A
QUESTION I SHOULD BE ASKING AND
CERTAINLY WELCOME YOUR THOUGHTS
ON ON THIS OTHER TRANSPORTATION
OR ANY OTHER SECTION OF THE
OF THE CITY'S BUDGET.
I THINK YOU KNOW WHAT ELSE YOUR
NEXT COMMISSION MEMBER HOW
ABOUT MY RACE GO FOR MY
FAVORITE.
I LOVE TO TELL YOU I WAS TRYING
TO MAKE IT RAISED BUT HERE THEY
ARE QUICK ENOUGH.
SO ARE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION
ON DISABILITY ISSUES.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT TRYING TO
MAKE ONE OF THE THINGS WE'RE
LOOKING AT IS IF THEY KEEP THE
THE THE RESTAURANTS OPEN ON
WEEKENDS IN THE ROAD SUCH AS
MAIN STREET WHERE THEY CLOSED
THE ROAD, WE'RE TRYING TO LOOK
AT HOW TO MAKE THAT IF THEY'RE
GOING TO KEEP DOING THAT, HOW
TO MAKE THAT MORE ACCESSIBLE
BECAUSE BEING A VISUALLY
IMPAIRED GUY I DON'T MIND
SITTING OUT THERE BUT TRYING TO
GO THROUGH ON THE WAY TO
SOMEWHERE ELSE CAN BE A MAZE
AND YOU KNOW, PEOPLE PULL OUT
CHAIRS, TABLES MOVED AROUND AND
STUFF LIKE THAT OR AND I
IMAGINE PEOPLE IN WHEELCHAIRS
ARE HAVING TROUBLE WALKING SOME
OF THE SAME ISSUES.
>> SO WE'RE TRYING TO MAKE THAT
GET TOGETHER WITH FOLKS AND
MAKE THAT A LITTLE SAFER.
AND ANOTHER THING CAME UP THAT
WE'RE GOING TO EXPLORE ABOUT
APPARENTLY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
LEAVING LOTS OF THINGS, LOTS
OF OBSTRUCTIONS IN THE MIDDLE
OF SIDEWALK SUCH SHOPPING CARTS
AND AND SCOOTERS AND THAT KIND
OF THING.
AND WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT IF WE GET SOMEHOW GET THE
FREQUENCY THAT REDUCED BY QUITE
A BIT.
>> THANK YOU VERY THANK YOU.
>> RIGHT NEXT TO OUR COMMISSION
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS.
AND SO THE NEW COMMISSIONER OUR
INVITED TO PROVIDE REPORTS AND
UPDATES ANYTHING ANYONE I JUST
WANTED TO MAKE A COMMENT
RELATED TO THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOURTH STREET RESURFACING
PROJECT.
SO AT THE LAST MEETING I ASKED
SOME QUESTIONS RELATED TO THE
BURWOOD PROJECT AND I JUST
WANTED TO EXPRESS MY
APPRECIATION FOR STAFF BEING
REALLY PROMPT IN GETTING THE
OUTPUTS OF PUBLIC INPUT FROM
THE APRIL 4TH OPEN HOUSE AND
PREVIOUS SURVEY UP ONTO THE
WEBSITE AND ONE OF OUR PUBLIC
COMMENT EMAILS FROM THIS WEEK
RELATED TO THIS PROJECT AND
NOTED I THINK IN THE
PRELIMINARY PLAN A LACK
OF CROSSWALKS BETWEEN LIBERTY
STREET AND FAIR SO REALLY NICE
TO SEE THAT THE FINAL PLAN
INCLUDES TWO ADDITIONAL
CROSSWALKS FROM PUBLIC OUTPUT
OR PUBLIC INPUT.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT AND
THANKS TO ALL THE MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC THAT PARTICIPATED
IN THE FEEDBACK PROCESS.
YEAH, ALL RIGHT.
>> OUR MONTHLY CALL FOR AGENDA
ITEMS RAYMOND, WOULD YOU LIKE
TO REVIEW THE WORK PLAN AND
THEN PREVIOUSLY REQUESTED
AGENDA ITEMS?
>> SURE.
SO WE HAVE THE SHARED MICRO
MOBILITY PROVIDER CONTRACT
COMING BACK TO YOU AND IN OTHER
WORDS, THIS CONTRACT SPIN
YOU'VE BOTH REQUESTED IT AND
THEIR CONTRACT IS UP FOR
RENEWAL ANYWAY.
SO WE'LL BE BRINGING THAT SPIN
HAS EMERGED FROM THEIR
BANKRUPTCY SO THEY ARE OUT
OF THAT NOW AND THAT ANYWAY
WE'LL TALK MORE ABOUT THAT NEXT
MONTH.
WE ALSO HAVE PENCILED IN AN
UPDATE FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE.
WE TRY TO INVITE THEM ANNUALLY
TO GIVE US AN UPDATE ON THE
THINGS THAT THEY'RE WORKING ON
.
THEY'VE GOTTEN SOME BIG GRANTS
THAT ARE JUST KICKING OFF SO
HOPEFULLY JIM SAYER'S AVAILABLE
AND CAN COME JOIN US AGAIN.
SIMILARLY WE MIGHT HEAR FROM
THE REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
AUTHORITY RTA.
THEY MIGHT COME AND GIVE US AN
UPDATE AND THEN ANOTHER ONE
THAT'S BEEN REQUESTED BY THIS
COMMISSION THAT I WASN'T ABLE
TO GET TOGETHER FOR TONIGHT'S
MEETING BUT HOPEFULLY WE CAN BY
NEXT MEETING IS WINTER
MAINTENANCE THIS LAST WINTER IN
REVIEW.
SO THE TWENTY THREE TWENTY FOUR
SEASON AND JUST TALKING ABOUT
WHAT THE PLAN IS GOING FORWARD
YOU HEARD A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
THAT TONIGHT DURING THE BUDGET
PROCESS BUT MAYBE WE CAN KIND
OF GO A LITTLE BIT DEEPER ON
THAT WHETHER I'LL BE GIVING
THAT PRESENTATION OR IF WE'LL
HEAR FROM PUBLIC WORKS AND
PARKS OR IS YET TO BE SEEN.
SO THOSE ARE AND THE RESULT
CARRYOVER ITEMS FROM THIS MONTH
.
I MIGHT BE ABLE TO COME BACK
WITH YOU WITH SOME THOUGHTS
ABOUT THIS CRASH RESPONSE
REPORTING AND HOW WE CAN GIVE A
LITTLE SYNOPSIS OF OUR
FINDINGS.
SO I WANT TO AGAIN TALK WITH
THROUGH THE TEAM AND THEN I CAN
MAYBE PUT SOMETHING BACK BEFORE
YOU ON THAT MATTER.
THANK YOU, PETE, ABOUT THE
MICRO MOBILITY TOPIC.
I DO HAVE SOME SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS THAT I MEAN FOR SPIN
AND NO, YOU WON'T BE SURPRISED
TO LEARN THAT THEY ARE AROUND
THE FATALITY AND THE SERIOUS
INJURY CRASH THAT WE HAD ON
SPEED SCOOTERS IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE.
SO IS THERE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SEND TO THEM SOME QUESTIONS IN
ADVANCE SO THAT WE'RE NOT
BLINDSIDING THEM HERE IN THE
MEETING?
I GUESS I'D LIKE TO GIVE THEM
THE CHANCE TO MAKE A A REASONED
AND THOUGHTFUL ANSWER ABOUT
ABOUT THE STUFF.
>> YEAH, FEEL FREE TO SEND
THOSE TO MY ATTENTION.
YOU CAN COPY CHRIS AND THEN IF
YOU WOULD LIKE YOU CAN COPY THE
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR.
SO FEEL FREE TO DO THAT.
I WILL ADMIT I DON'T KNOW IF I
WAS EXPECTING SPIN TO BE
JOINING US AT THE MEETING.
SO GIVEN THE NATURE OF THE
QUESTIONS WHETHER WE SHOULD
INVITE THEM OR NOT, IT WAS
GOING TO BE MORE ABOUT JUST
KIND OF THE CONTRACT RENEWAL.
SO MAYBE THE SOONER YOU GIVE ME
THOSE QUESTIONS THE SOONER I
CAN GO WITH THEM IF THEY'RE
AVAILABLE TO JOIN.
>> OK, I MEAN I'LL COME IN AND
SAY THAT MY SUPPORT FOR RENEWAL
OF THEIR CONTRACT IS CONTINGENT
ON THEIR YOU KNOW, THEIR
POLICIES AND THEIR ACTIONS
REGARDING SOME OF THE PROBLEMS
WE'VE HAD WITH SPIN SCOOTERS
RECENTLY.
SO I'D LIKE TO KNOW WHAT
THEY'RE DOING
.
ALL RIGHT.
AS ALWAYS, IF YOU HAVE ANY
OTHER TOPICS OR IDEAS OR AGENDA
ITEMS, JUST SEND ONE COPY TO
HAPPY TO HEAR THEM.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE NEXT MAYBE NEXT MEETING
WILL BE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, MAY
15TH.
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR P.M. THAT
WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL MEETING
AND THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS.
WE WILL ADJOURN OUR APRIL 17
TWELVE TWENTY FOUR MEETING
SEEING SEEING NO OBJECTIONS.
THIS MEETING ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU